Yoga brings the body and mind together and is built on three main elements – movement, breathing and meditation. Yoga has many physical and mental health benefits including improved posture, flexibility, strength, balance and body awareness.
Always consult your doctor before embarking on any new fitness program, especially if you have a pre-existing medical condition or have not exercised in a long time.
Pilates and yoga are often thought to be one in the same, however Pilates traditionally focuses more on control of movement and muscular endurance as opposed to yoga which connects the body to the mind through flow of movement.
Yoga is an ancient Indian philosophy that dates back thousands of years. It was designed as a path to spiritual enlightenment, but in modern times, the physical aspects of yoga have found huge popularity as a gentle form of exercise and stress management. There are many different varieties of yoga, but each one essentially relies on structured poses (asanas) practiced with breath awareness.
Researchers have discovered that the regular practice of yoga may produce many health benefits, including increased cardiovascular fitness, improved muscular strength and normalisation of blood pressure. Yoga is a renowned antidote to stress and promotes improved sleeping patterns. Over time, those who practice yoga report lower levels of stress, and increased feelings of happiness and wellbeing. This is because concentrating on the postures and the breath acts as a form of meditation.
The classical techniques of yoga date back more than 5000 years. The practice of yoga encourages effort, intelligence, accuracy, thoroughness, commitment and dedication. The word yoga originates from the Sanskrit language and means ‘to join or yoke together’. It brings your body and mind together, and is built on three main elements – exercise, breathing and meditation.
The movements of yoga are designed to  challenge flexibility, balance, coordination and strength, increasing your body’s efficiency and overall health. Breathing techniques promote greater mind body connection, improving the  function of body and mind.
Focusing on controlled movement and breathing prepares the body and mind for meditation, with an approach to a quiet mind that allows silence and relief from everyday stress. When practiced regularly, yoga can become a powerful and sophisticated discipline for achieving physical, mental and emotional wellbeing.
There are many different varieties of yoga, each with a slightly different slant. The most popular are Hatha, Bikram, Iyengar, Yin and Vinyasa yoga.
Each yoga posture, or asana, is held for a period of time and linked with controlled breathing. Generally, a yoga session begins with gentle asanas and works up to more vigorous or challenging postures. A full yoga session should move every part of your body and should include pranayama (breath control practices), relaxation and meditation.
The different postures or asanas include:
The practice of yoga asanas develops strength and flexibility, while soothing your nerves and calming your mind. The asanas affect the muscles, joints and skin, and the whole body – glands, nerves, internal organs, bones, respiration and the brain. The physical building blocks of yoga are the posture and the breath.
Health benefits of yoga include:
Yoga is taught in classes, catering for beginners through to advanced participants. It is non-competitive and suitable for anyone, regardless of your age or fitness level. Your yoga teacher should carefully guide and observe you, and modify postures when necessary.
An asana should never cause pain. If you experience pain or discomfort, ease back on the stretch or don’t do it at all. It is important to keep within your physical limits.
If you are a male over 45 years of age or a female over 55 years of age, haven’t exercised for a long time or have a pre-existing medical condition, you should check with your preferred general practitioner or another suitably qualified professional before starting any new or regular exercise routine.
Pre-exercise  screeningExternal Link   is used to identify people with medical conditions or contraindications that may put them at a higher risk of experiencing an adverse event during physical activity. It is a tool to help decide if the potential benefits of exercise outweigh the risks for you and whether you should seek further guidance from an allied health or medical professional.
Yoga classes usually have 10 to 20 people, allowing for individual attention. Suggestions for getting the most out of your yoga class include:

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

Content on this website is provided for information purposes only. Information about a therapy, service, product or treatment does not in any way endorse or support such therapy, service, product or treatment and is not intended to replace advice from your doctor or other registered health professional. The information and materials contained on this website are not intended to constitute a comprehensive guide concerning all aspects of the therapy, product or treatment described on the website. All users are urged to always seek advice from a registered health care professional for diagnosis and answers to their medical questions and to ascertain whether the particular therapy, service, product or treatment described on the website is suitable in their circumstances. The State of Victoria and the Department of Health shall not bear any liability for reliance by any user on the materials contained on this website.

This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        Allergies to insect stings and bites range from milder allergic reactions to life-threatening, severe allergic reactions (anaphylaxis).
      

        All medication has the potential to cause allergies but some people can have allergic reactions to specific prescription or over-the-counter medications.
      

        Aspergillus is a fungus that commonly grows on rotting vegetation. It can cause asthma symptoms.
      

        Find out when thunderstorm asthma events take place, risks, symptoms and how to protect yourself and others. What people with hay fever and asthma should know.
      

        Areas around the home that are heavily used, such as beds and upholstered furniture, will have much higher mite populations than the rest of the house.
      

        Asthma triggers are substances, conditions or activities that lead to symptoms of asthma.
      

        The best way to manage latex allergy is to avoid exposure to latex products.
      

        The way to control indoor mould growth is to control the source of moisture.
      

        Pollen allergies cause seasonal hay fever and asthma and can be treated with antihistamines, nasal sprays or asthma medication
      

        Watch Mohamed's story and hear how his hay fever turned to asthma after a thunderstorm asthma event.
      

        Anaphylaxis is a severe allergic reaction that requires urgent medical attention.
      

        Eczema can vary in severity, and symptoms may flare up or subside from day to day.
      

        Hay fever is an allergic reaction to airborne allergens that can occur at any time of the year.
      

        Hives (urticaria) are a reaction to the release of histamine into the skin.
      

        Watch Mohamed's story and hear how his hay fever turned to asthma after a thunderstorm asthma event.
      

        Severe allergic reactions (anaphylaxis) and asthma attacks need urgent emergency first aid. In an emergency, always call triple zero (000).
      

        Allergy occurs when the body overreacts to a 'trigger' that is harmless to most people.
      

        Allergy testing is used to find which substances provoke an allergic reaction.
      

        Many people with asthma find their symptoms can worsen when they are exposed to certain allergens like house dust mite, animal dander, pollen and mould.
      

        The immune system remembers every germ it has ever overcome.
      

        Coeliac disease is an immune disease caused by gluten.
      

        Milk allergy symptoms range from mild to a life-threatening severe allergic reaction. Avoid food containing milk only under strict medical supervision.
      

        Egg allergy is one of the most common causes of allergies in children with symptoms ranging from mild to life-threatening reactions.
      

        The long-term effects of consuming a combination of different additives in our food are currently unknown.
      

        Food allergy is an immune response, while food intolerance is a chemical reaction.
      

        Food labels carry useful information to help you make good choices about food.
      

        Gluten sensitivity can be managed with a gluten-free diet.
      

        Symptoms of lactose intolerance include bloating, gas, abdominal pain and diarrhoea.
      

        Peanuts, tree nuts and seeds can all cause allergies with symptoms ranging from milder reactions to a severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis).
      

        Raw milk is milk that has not been pasteurised to kill bacteria that could be harmful to humans.
      

        Symptoms of fish and shellfish allergies vary and range from milder reactions to a life-threatening severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis).
      

        Severe allergic reactions (anaphylaxis) and asthma attacks need urgent emergency first aid. In an emergency, always call triple zero (000).
      

        There are many ways in which you can transform your home into an asthma-friendly environment.
      

        If you have an allergy, visit your doctor before you travel, especially if you are at risk of a severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis) or an asthma attack.
      

        For unexpected after-hours medical issues, there are telephone helplines, pharmacies, after-hours medical clinics or doctors who can visit you at home.
      

        Allergy testing is used to find which substances provoke an allergic reaction.
      

        Anaphylaxis is a severe allergic reaction that requires urgent medical attention.
      

        Pregnant women with asthma need to continue to take their asthma medication as it is important to the health of both mother and baby that the mother's asthma is under control.
      

        If your child has asthma, the childcare centre or school should have relevant action plans and staff trained to deal with asthma emergencies.
      

        Careful diagnosis of adult onset asthma is important, because the symptoms can be confused with other conditions.
      

        Many people with asthma find their symptoms can worsen when they are exposed to certain allergens like house dust mite, animal dander, pollen and mould.
      

        Asthma triggered by exercise can be prevented with medication and by preparing for exercise and physical activity.
      

        Asthma affects about one in 10 teenagers in Australia.
      

        Before taking your trip, visit your doctor to make sure your asthma is under control well before you leave.
      

        Asthma attacks need urgent emergency first aid. In an emergency, always call triple zero (000).
      

        Asthma cannot be cured, but with good management people with asthma can lead normal, active lives.
      

        Parents and children talk about some of the factors that can cause a child's asthma to flare up.
      

        An asthma action plan can help you take control of your asthma and feel confident managing it.
      

        Your doctor will prescribe the correct medications that can either help to relieve or prevent the symptoms of asthma.
      

        There are many ways in which you can transform your home into an asthma-friendly environment.
      

        Doctors do not have a single test to diagnose asthma so your doctor must understand your symptoms and eliminate other possible causes of your symptoms
      

        Eczema can vary in severity, and symptoms may flare up or subside from day to day.
      

        Find out when thunderstorm asthma events take place, risks, symptoms and how to protect yourself and others. What people with hay fever and asthma should know.
      

        Hay fever is an allergic reaction to airborne allergens that can occur at any time of the year.
      

        Asthma triggers are substances, conditions or activities that lead to symptoms of asthma.
      

        The immune system remembers every germ it has ever overcome.
      

        A Consumer Medicines Information (CMI) leaflet gives you accurate information about the safety of your medication and how best to take it.
      

        Pollen allergies cause seasonal hay fever and asthma and can be treated with antihistamines, nasal sprays or asthma medication
      

        Get the most out of your consultation by preparing for your health or medical appointment. 
      

        The respiratory system takes up oxygen from the air we breathe and expels the unwanted carbon dioxide.
      

        To get the most out of the conversation with your doctor, nurse or other healthcare provider, it is best to be open about providing information and to speak up if you don?t understand.
      

        Watch Mohamed's story and hear how his hay fever turned to asthma after a thunderstorm asthma event.
      

        If you have an allergy, visit your doctor before you travel, especially if you are at risk of a severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis) or an asthma attack.
      

        Immediate telephone assistance is available for all kinds of emergencies.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        A person with Asperger syndrome often has trouble understanding the emotions of other people.
      

        ASD is a complex disorder that affects a person's ability to interact with the world around them.
      

        Autism spectrum disorder is a lifelong condition, but you are not on your own and there are plenty of professionals and groups who can help.
      

        I'm Max and I have autism and that's ok!
      

        We put the "awe" into autism!
      

        An adult with properly managed ADHD often shows great imagination and creative flair.
      

        Untreated behavioural disorders in children may mean they grow up to be dysfunctional adults.
      

        Early childhood interventions help babies and young children with developmental delays or disabilities.
      

        For children diagnosed with a disability, getting the support they need as early as possible will give them the best chance of minimising the long-term effects of the disability. 
      

        I'm Max and I have autism and that's ok!
      

        We put the "awe" into autism!
      

        An adult with properly managed ADHD often shows great imagination and creative flair.
      

        Children with ADHD may benefit from medication or other therapies, or a combination of both.
      

        Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a behavioural disorder, not an illness or a sign of low intelligence.
      

        Untreated behavioural disorders in children may mean they grow up to be dysfunctional adults.
      

        People with borderline personality disorder may exhibit extreme behaviour, such as repeated self-mutilation or taking overdoses of medication.
      

        Children with untreated conduct disorder (CD) are at increased risk of problems including substance use, personality disorders and mental illnesses.
      

        Oppositional defiant disorder is a childhood behavioural problem characterised by constant disobedience and hostility.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.
Whether it's health conditions, health services or tips for healthy living, you can find it here.
Be a life-maker. Help make the life of a child – and family – possible by becoming an egg or sperm donor with Public Fertility Care.
To bridge the gap in women's healthcare, we are leading the delivery of a program of work to change the way women’s health issues are treated
Mental Health and Wellbeing Local is a new service that supports Victorian adults to get mental health and wellbeing treatment, care and support closer to home.
The Community Pharmacist pilot allows people to receive some treatments at a local pharmacy without needing to see a doctor to get a prescription.
Getting checked that is. Sex is a normal part of life. If you’re sexually active, get a sexual health check at least once a year.
Oral health resources to help you care for your child or teenager's teeth.
Community transmission is slowing in Victoria, but COVID continues to be a part of our lives. Follow the 6 steps to protect yourself and those most at risk.
Everything you need to know about the pregnancy journey, from conception through to birth.
Food poisoning is caused by eating contaminated food and affects a large number of Australians every year.
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        People can manage their arthritis using medication, physiotherapy, exercise and self management techniques.
      

        Pain is our built-in alarm system. It makes us aware that something might be going wrong in our body. However, there are many things you can do to deal effectively with persistent pain.
      

        Pain is our built-in alarm system. It makes us aware that something might be going wrong in our body. However, there are many things you can do to deal effectively with persistent pain.
      

        Living with persistent pain isn’t easy. Your doctor can help you balance your pain, your treatment and hurdles you encounter in life.
      

        No special diet or 'miracle food' can cure arthritis, but some conditions may be helped by avoiding or including certain foods.
      

        Exercise can reduce some of the symptoms of arthritis, and improve joint mobility and strength.
      

        Pain is our built-in alarm system. It makes us aware that something might be going wrong in our body. However, there are many things you can do to deal effectively with persistent pain.
      

        People of all ages and fitness levels can practice tai chi and may gain health benefits.
      

        People can manage their arthritis using medication, physiotherapy, exercise and self management techniques.
      

        Knee replacement surgery removes a diseased knee joint and replaces it with an artificial joint.
      

        Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medicines should always be used cautiously and for the shortest time possible.
      

        Always see your doctor if you have ongoing pain to find the best pain-management option for you.
      

        Pain is our built-in alarm system. It makes us aware that something might be going wrong in our body. However, there are many things you can do to deal effectively with persistent pain.
      

        Ankylosing spondylitis (AS) is a type of inflammatory arthritis that targets the joints of the spine.
      

        One child in every 1,000 in Australia is diagnosed with juvenile arthritis. It is one of the most common chronic conditions to affect children.
      

        People can manage their arthritis using medication, physiotherapy, exercise and self management techniques.
      

        Fibromyalgia is a condition associated with widespread pain and tenderness.
      

        While most other types of arthritis develop slowly, an attack of gout happens suddenly, often overnight.
      

        Many people will experience symptoms of osteoarthritis as they age.
      

        Typical symptoms of polymyalgia rheumatica include severe muscle aches and stiffness, particularly in the neck, shoulders and thighs.
      

        Reactive arthritis is a form of arthritis that occurs as a result of some bacterial infections.
      

        Early treatment of rheumatoid arthritis is important in  helping you manage the condition more effectively.
      

        People can manage their arthritis using medication, physiotherapy, exercise and self management techniques.
      

        Most people can resume normal activities around three weeks after an arthroscopy.
      

        Back pain is common. Some people will develop back pain that is persistent (lasts more than three months). There are many things that you can do to live well with back pain. 
      

        A chronic or long term illness means the person has to adjust to the demands of the illness and the therapy used to treat the condition.
      

        Elbow pain and can result from overuse in a range of sports or occupations.
      

        The hip joint is complicated to allow a wide range of motion while still supporting the weight of the body.
      

        A joint is the part of the body where two or more bones meet to allow movement.
      

        Treatments like physiotherapy, osteopathy or remedial massage can generally help neck and shoulder pain.
      

        Shoulder pain is common in our community. The good news is that with appropriate treatment pain will improve so you can get back to doing the things you enjoy.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        A step-by-step guide to support you through COVID-19 to your recovery. 
      

        What to do if you're a contact of someone with COVID-19.
      

        Antivirals are available for eligible people to treat COVID-19.
      

        Find out about the long-term symptoms and effects of COVID-19.
      

        Learn about what the symptoms of COVID-19 are, how it spreads and what viral shedding is.
      

        How to book your COVID-19 booster appointment and advice about vaccination.
      

        How to get a test for COVID-19 in Victoria.
      

        Face masks can prevent COVID-19 transmission.
      

        Find out how ventilation helps you lower the spread of COVID-19.
      

        Being prepared is the best way to reduce your risk from COVID-19 as an older person, including making a plan to access antivirals.
      

        Information and resources for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Victorians. 
      

        Information about COVID-19 for people with disability and people caring for them.
      

        Find out about travelling to and from Victoria, including both interstate and international advice.
      

        ኮቪድ-19ን ለመቆጣጠር እና ለመከላከል የሚሆን ምክር።
      

        نصائح للتعامل مع مرض كوفيد-١٩ والحماية منه
      

        COVID-19 নিয়ন্ত্রণ এবং সুরক্ষার জন্য পরামর্শ।
      

        ကိုဗစ်-၁၉ကို စီမံခန့်ခွဲခြင်းနှင့် ကာကွယ်ခြင်းအတွက် အကြံပြုချက်။
      

        Wëët tënë mɛ̈c ku gël/tiët në abaŋde COVID-19.
      

        Information about COVID-19 in your language.
      

        توصی19ه هایی برای مدیریت و محافظت در برابر کووید-
      

        Payo para sa pamamahala at pagprotekta laban sa COVID-19.
      

        Συμβουλές για την διαχείριση και την προστασία από τον ιό COVID-19.
      

        कोविड-19 के प्रबंधन और इससे सुरक्षा के लिए सलाह।
      

        Raccomandazioni su come gestire e proteggerti dal COVID-19.
      

        ដំបូន្មានសម្រាប់ការគ្រប់គ្រង និងការការពារប្រឆាំងទល់នឹង COVID-19។
      

        COVID-19 관리 및 보호를 위한 권고사항.
      

        Nasihat untuk menguruskan COVID-19 dan melindungi diri daripadanya.
      

        Parir biex timmaniġġja u tipproteġi lilek innifsek mill-COVID-19.
      

        COVID-19 विरुद्ध व्यवस्थापन र सुरक्षाको लागि सल्लाह।
      

        COVID-19 ਨਾਲ ਨਜਿੱਠਣ ਅਤੇ ਇਸ ਤੋਂ ਸੁਰੱਖਿਆ ਲਈ ਸਲਾਹ।
      

        应对及防范 COVID-19 的建议。
      

        කෝවිඩ්-19ට එරෙහිව ආරක්ෂා වීම හා එය කළමනාකරණය කිරීම පිළිබඳ උපදෙස්.
      

        Consejos para manejar y protegerse contra el COVID-19.
      

        கோவிட்-19 நோய்த்தொற்றை நிர்வகிப்பதற்கும், அதிலிருந்து பாதுகாப்பதற்குமான ஆலோசனை.
      

        คำแนะนำสำหรับการจัดการและการป้องกันโรคติดเชื้อไวรัส COVID-19
      

        管理、預防感染新冠病毒之建議
      

        COVID-19'u yönetme ve ondan korunmaya yönelik öneriler.
      

        COVID-19 کو سنبھالنے اور اس کے خلاف تحفظ کے لیے معلومات
      

        Lời khuyên để kiểm soát và bảo vệ chống lại COVID-19.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.
Viewing 1-10 of 144 results

      1800RESPECT is a national sexual assault, domestic and family violence counselling service.
    

      Djirra's Aboriginal Family Violence Legal Service program helps Aboriginal people who are experiencing or recovering from family violence or sexual assault.
    

      Assessment and treatment programs for people experiencing a mental health crisis.
    

      Voluntary and in-voluntary short-term in-patient management and treatment.
    

      Community-based, short-term supported residential services for people experiencing a mental health problem
    

      Report and discuss unexpected and undesirable side effects (adverse experiences) with medicine.
    

      Aged Care Assessment Service teams find the kind of care that best suits your needs.
    

      APMH services are for people with a long-standing mental illness who are now over 65 years of age.
    

      ADF programs and research help to prevent alcohol and other drug harm.
    

      The ASRC is committed to upholding the human rights of all people seeking asylum.
    
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        Well-managed anger can be a useful emotion that motivates you to make positive changes.
      

        There are many people you can talk to who can help you overcome feelings of wanting to lash out.
      

        Untreated behavioural disorders in children may mean they grow up to be dysfunctional adults.
      

        Children with untreated conduct disorder (CD) are at increased risk of problems including substance use, personality disorders and mental illnesses.
      

        It is normal to disagree with each other from time to time and occasional conflict is part of family life.
      

        Oppositional defiant disorder is a childhood behavioural problem characterised by constant disobedience and hostility.
      

        With the physical and emotional closeness of a partnership, it is inevitable that there is sometimes conflict.
      

        Certain children are at a higher risk of physical or emotional harm than others due to their living circumstances or home environment.
      

        There is a range of non-government agencies available to help families under stress in caring for their children.
      

        People with a disability who experience violence, abuse or neglect can seek help from a range of services specifically designed to help them.
      

        When you, your partner or someone in your family has a mental illness, it can cause stress and worry for everyone.
      

        The following services provide specialised healthcare for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in Victoria.
      

        Children and young people are not to blame for violence at home, it's not your fault and it's not a special secret
      

        Children exposed to domestic violence are more likely to experience emotional and behavioural problems.
      

        Perpetrators often make excuses for their violence, for example, blaming alcohol or stress.
      

        Victoria has a range of services available to help people at risk of, experiencing or escaping from family violence.
      

        People with a mental illness who are receiving effective treatment are no more violent than anyone else in the community.
      

        People with a disability who experience violence, abuse or neglect can seek help from a range of services specifically designed to help them.
      

        Family violence can be physical, sexual, psychological, emotional, economic, spiritual or legal abuse. All family violence is illegal and unacceptable.
      

        The following services provide specialised healthcare for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in Victoria.
      

        Victoria has a range of services available to help people at risk of, experiencing or escaping from family violence.
      

        There is a range of non-government agencies available to help families under stress in caring for their children.
      

        Family violence can be physical, sexual, psychological, emotional, economic, spiritual or legal abuse. All family violence is illegal and unacceptable.
      

        Immediate telephone assistance is available for all kinds of emergencies.
      

        Date rape can be especially common among young people who have had little sexual experience and aren’t sure that what they have experienced crosses the line into rape. Many victims of date rape can feel pressure not to report the crime, or feel embarrassed or responsible for the attack.
      

        People with a disability who experience violence, abuse or neglect can seek help from a range of services specifically designed to help them.
      

        Too many children are physically, sexually and emotionally abused and when this happens, it is up to adults to speak up.
      

        If you suspect sexual abuse or have been told about it by a child, you must report it.
      

        As a parent, you have an important role in helping your child recover from sexual abuse.
      

        Sexual assault is any unwanted sexual behaviour or activity that makes the victim feel uncomfortable, frightened or threatened.
      

        Cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) can help you change unhelpful or unhealthy habits of thinking, feeling and behaving.
      

        Children and young people are not to blame for violence at home, it's not your fault and it's not a special secret
      

        Babies and toddlers can be as affected by trauma as any other family member.
      

        Preschoolers may not have the words but will show their distress at traumatic events through changes in behaviour and functioning.
      

        Tell your child the facts about a distressing or frightening experience using language they can understand.
      

        When a family is affected by trauma, everyone will react in a different way.
      

        Children look to their parents or carers to judge how to deal with a crisis.
      

        Teenagers may turn to friends rather than parents for support in times of trauma and distress.
      

        A teenager may be deeply upset by a traumatic event, but not share their feelings with their parents.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        There is generally no cure for an autoimmune disorder, but the symptoms can be managed.
      

        Myalgic encephalomyelitis, commonly known as chronic fatigue syndrome, can affect people of any age, including children.
      

        Type 1 diabetes can affect anyone of any age, but is more common in people under 30 years.
      

        Most people with Guillain-Barré syndrome experienced some form of viral or bacterial infection before the onset of symptoms.
      

        Henoch-Schonlein purpura causes a purple spotted skin rash which lasts around one to four weeks, and is often marked by relapses.
      

        All about HIV and AIDS including HIV transmission, how HIV spreads, prevention, symptoms, treatment, testing, letting sexual partners know, reducing stigma and where to get help.
      

        Hughes syndrome is thickening of the blood caused by abnormal immune system cells.
      

        Immune thrombocytopenic purpura (ITP) is a rare autoimmune disorder in which a person?s immune system destroys the platelets that help their blood to clot.
      

        Lipoedema is a painful, chronic, symmetrical swelling in the legs, thighs, buttocks and sometimes arms due to the accumulation of fat in the subcutaneous tissues.
      

        Myasthenia gravis is an autoimmune disease that causes muscle weakness.
      

        Polymyositis is hard to diagnose and may be mistaken for muscular dystrophy.
      

        PEP (post-exposure prophylaxis) is antiviral medication to prevent HIV infection. Learn what is PEP, what PEP is for, where to get PEP, important reminders about PEP and where to get help. 
      

        Pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) is an oral medication to prevent HIV in people at risk. All about PrEP, what PrEP is for, dosage, where to get PrEP, PrEP side effects, PrEP health checks and support.
      

        Raynaud's phenomenon can be a sign of a more serious underlying condition, so see your doctor if you experience it.
      

        Reactive arthritis is a form of arthritis that occurs as a result of some bacterial infections.
      

        Early treatment of rheumatoid arthritis is important in  helping you manage the condition more effectively.
      

        The most common symptom of scleroderma is a thickening and hardening of the skin, particularly of the hands and face.
      

        Sjogren’s syndrome can be managed with medications and products such as artificial tears and saliva.
      

        Hashimoto's disease progresses very slowly over many years, so the symptoms may go unnoticed.
      

        Hyperthyroidism can be diagnosed with a simple blood test that measures thyroid hormone levels.
      

        The immune system remembers every germ it has ever overcome.
      

        Vaccines stimulate the body to produce antibodies to provide immunity against one or several diseases.
      

        Lupus can be mild or life-threatening, depending on which tissues are affected.
      

        The most common infections for people with lupus include those of the respiratory tract, skin and urinary system.
      

        Lupus most commonly appears in women of childbearing age.
      

        Lupus can be controlled with medications, so the majority of affected women are able to have children.
      

        Fluid retention (oedema) occurs when fluid isn't removed from the body tissues, including the skin. Causes include the body's reaction to hot weather, a high salt intake and menstrual cycle hormones.
      

        The lymphatic manages fluid levels in the body, filters out bacteria and houses types of white blood cells.
      

        Women who have undergone treatment of breast cancer are particularly susceptible to lymphoedema of the arm.
      

        Lymphoma is a general term for a cancer that begins in the lymphatic system.
      

        Surgically removing a diseased or damaged spleen is possible without causing any serious harm to the person.
      

        Any conditions that cause a rapid breakdown of blood cells can place great strain on the spleen and make it enlarge.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        CPR is a life-saving skill that everyone should learn from an accredited organisation.
      

        Being immunised from an early age helps protect your child against serious childhood infections.
      

        There is a range of subsidised and free health services, including services for mental health and dental health, available for children in Victoria.
      

        Parenting is one of the most important tasks we undertake but it doesn't always come naturally.
      

        Everyone's immunisation needs are different and are influenced by your health, lifestyle, age and occupation.
      

        For children diagnosed with a disability, getting the support they need as early as possible will give them the best chance of minimising the long-term effects of the disability. 
      

        Detailing on baby bathing from Royal Women's Hospital
      

        Detail on baby skin care from Royal Women's Hospital
      

        You can help your child overcome anxiety by taking their fears seriously and encouraging them to talk about their feelings.
      

        If your child's shyness is especially debilitating, you may like to consider professional help from a counsellor or psychologist.
      

        Sibling rivalry is a common problem, particularly among children who are the same sex and close together in age.
      

        Disciplining your child means teaching them responsible behaviour and self-control.
      

        Dummy sucking should stop before school age to avoid teeth or mouth problems.
      

        Dyslexia is a type of specific learning difficulty (SLD) in which the person has difficulties with language and words.
      

        When a young child is having a tantrum, it is because the emotional (limbic system) part of the brain is dominating the child's behaviour.
      

        Finger or thumb sucking should stop before school age to avoid mouth problems.
      

        If you restrict yourself to a narrow range of foods, your child will notice and copy your wariness.
      

        Some toddlers do most of their eating on the run, refusing to sit down at the table at all.
      

        Taking care to restrain children correctly while travelling in a car is the best way to prevent injuries.
      

        Being immunised from an early age helps protect your child against serious childhood infections.
      

        Detailing on baby bathing from Royal Women's Hospital
      

        Detail on baby skin care from Royal Women's Hospital
      

        There is a range of subsidised and free health services, including services for mental health and dental health, available for children in Victoria.
      

        Melissa shares her story of how her baby caught chickenpox at 5 weeks old.
      

        This is your first key age and stage visit with a maternal and child health nurse – there are 10 visits in total from birth to when your child is three and a half years.
      

        Breastmilk or commercial infant formula is necessary for all babies less than 12 months.
      

        Breastfeeding positioning and attachment come naturally to some babies and mothers, but many need time and practice to get it right.
      

        Be guided by your baby and let them set the pace when weaning and introducing solid foods.
      

        It is up to you and your baby to decide when breastfeeding should stop.
      

        Expressing breast milk by hand is a cheap and convenient method.
      

        Breastmilk protects your baby from illness and infection, so it is the safest drink for your baby while travelling.
      

        You can successfully combine breastfeeding with work if you have support from your employer, colleagues and family.
      

        Breastfeeding women need to eat regularly and include a wide variety of healthy foods in their diet.
      

        Symptoms of lactose intolerance include bloating, gas, abdominal pain and diarrhoea.
      

        Miscarriage, stillbirth or neonatal death is a shattering event for those expecting a baby. Grief and anxiety about subsequent pregnancies are common in these circumstances but counselling can help.
      

        You can reduce your baby's risk of sudden unexpected death by providing a safe sleeping environment and avoiding tobacco smoke.
      

        Babies and toddlers can be as affected by trauma as any other family member.
      

        Preschoolers may not have the words but will show their distress at traumatic events through changes in behaviour and functioning.
      

        Tell your child the facts about a distressing or frightening experience using language they can understand.
      

        Young babies still have a notion that the whole of life is happening inside themselves, and they are 'making it all happen'.
      

        Fun activities, such as shaking or banging objects, helps a baby understand they have an effect on the world.
      

        At nine months your baby is moving around by crawling or pulling along with their arms. Safety is very important now. Your baby is also 'talking' with recognisable sounds and may even say simple words.
      

        Between the age of one and two, your toddler understands they are a completely separate person from you.
      

        Parents can be tricked into thinking our toddlers are more grown up than they really are.
      

        A child learning to walk receives important sensory information from the soles of their feet, and shoes can make walking more difficult.
      

        Dyslexia is a type of specific learning difficulty (SLD) in which the person has difficulties with language and words.
      

        Babies and young children do not usually grow in a perfectly smooth way, but instead grow in 'bursts'.
      

        Teething symptoms are common in children and can be managed without medications.
      

        When toilet training your toddler, praise every little success and remain calm about accidents.
      

        Bronchiolitis is a common chest infection in babies under 6 months of age
      

        Caring for a crying baby with colic can be stressful, so take some time out to calm down.
      

        Cradle cap is not contagious and it is not caused by poor hygiene or bad parenting.
      

        Croup is a viral infection of the throat and windpipe that causes noisy breathing, a hoarse voice and a harsh, barking cough.
      

        Reflux is common in babies and causes no pain or problems with weight gain in most babies.
      

        Most babies get nappy rash at some stage, no matter how well they are cared for.
      

        Roseola is a mild viral infection with associated fever and rash that affects babies and young children.
      

        Be guided by your baby and let them set the pace when weaning and introducing solid foods.
      

        People who skip breakfast may lack sufficient vitamins and minerals including iron, calcium, zinc and vitamin B2.
      

        First foods for babies can be prepared easily and cheaply at home without salt, seasonings and sweeteners.
      

        If you eat and enjoy fruit and vegetables every day, your child may eventually follow your lead.
      

        Children have a natural ability to sense when they are hungry and when they are full.
      

        Offer children the same foods as the family, with a variety of textures and flavours for balanced nutrition.
      

        About iron and iron deficiency - symptoms, stages, causes, diagnosis, prevention, treatment, who is at risk, daily intake, food sources and supplements.
      

        If you restrict yourself to a narrow range of foods, your child will notice and copy your wariness.
      

        Encourage children to drink and enjoy water. Sweet drinks such as juice, cordial and soft drinks may cause health problems for children if consumed in large amounts.
      

        Some toddlers do most of their eating on the run, refusing to sit down at the table at all.
      

        This is your first key age and stage visit with a maternal and child health nurse – there are 10 visits in total from birth to when your child is three and a half years.
      

        This is your two week key age and stage visit with a maternal and child health nurse – there are 10 visits in total from birth to when your child is three and a half years.
      

        This is your four week key age and stage visit with a maternal and child health nurse – there are 10 visits in total from birth to when your child is three and a half years.
      

        This is your eight week key age and stage visit with a maternal and child health nurse – there are 10 visits in total from birth to when your child is three and a half years.
      

        This is your four month key age and stage visit with a maternal and child health nurse – there are 10 visits in total from birth to when your child is three and a half years.
      

        This is your sixth key age and stage visit with a maternal and child health nurse in your local area.  Maternal and child health nurses work in partnership with families to care for babies and young children until they start school. The service is free for all Victorian families.
      

        This is your seventh key age and stage visit with a maternal and child health nurse in your local area.  Maternal and child health nurses work in partnership with families to care for babies and young children until they start school. The service is free for all Victorian families.
      

        This is your eighth key age and stage visit with a maternal and child health nurse in your local area.  Maternal and child health nurses work in partnership with families to care for babies and young children until they start school. The service is free for all Victorian families.
      

        When your child turns two, it is time for their second from last key age and stage appointment with your maternal and child health nurse.
      

        When your child turns three-and-a-half, it is time for their final key age and stage appointment with your maternal and child health nurse.
      

        Detailing on baby bathing from Royal Women's Hospital
      

        Detail on baby skin care from Royal Women's Hospital
      

        If your baby is full-term and healthy, mild jaundice is nothing to worry about and will resolve by itself within a week or so.
      

        Every newborn baby in Australia is offered a test for the rare medical conditions of phenylketonuria, hypothyroidism, cystic fibrosis and congenital adrenal hyperplasia. 
      

        PKU is an inherited disorder that prevents the normal breakdown of a protein found in some foods.
      

        Sometimes premature labour can be delayed to increase a baby's chance of survival.
      

        You can reduce your baby's risk of sudden unexpected death by providing a safe sleeping environment and avoiding tobacco smoke.
      

        With low levels of vitamin K, some babies can have severe bleeding into the brain, causing significant brain damage.
      

        Most injuries to babies do not occur by chance - many are predictable and largely preventable.
      

        Some children are unsettled the first few nights in a 'big bed'. Try to be patient, loving and reassuring.
      

        Toddlers are most at risk of drowning because they are mobile and curious but don't understand the danger of water.
      

        CPR is a life-saving skill that everyone should learn from an accredited organisation.
      

        Taking care to restrain children correctly while travelling in a car is the best way to prevent injuries.
      

        In an emergency, it is recommended that all infants and their carers evacuate early or immediately when advised by emergency services.
      

        Children exposed to domestic violence are more likely to experience emotional and behavioural problems.
      

        Children who live on farms are at greater risk of injury and death than their parents or other farm workers.
      

        Call the Poisons Information Centre on 13 11 26 immediately if you suspect your child has been poisoned, given the wrong medicine or the wrong dose of medicine.
      

        As they grow and develop, and with the help of adults, children become increasingly aware of how they can manage their own safety, and become safer road users.
      

        You can reduce your baby's risk of sudden unexpected death by providing a safe sleeping environment and avoiding tobacco smoke.
      

        Some children are unsettled the first few nights in a 'big bed'. Try to be patient, loving and reassuring.
      

        A child needs a daytime nap until they are around 2 and a half to 3 years of age.
      

        Your child may have only a few scary dreams a year, or be troubled by nightmares much more often.
      

        You can reduce your baby's risk of sudden unexpected death by providing a safe sleeping environment and avoiding tobacco smoke.
      

        Newborn sleep patterns and behaviours - Newborns generally sleep 12 to 16 hours in a 24-hour period and do not know the difference between day and night.
      

        Baby sleep patterns and behaviours (3 to 6 months) – At this age, babies generally sleep 10 to 18 hours in a 24-hour period and need your help to settle and go to sleep.
      

        Baby sleep patterns and behaviours (6 to 12 months) – From about the age of 6 months, your baby’s sleep patterns gradually become more developed.
      

        Toddler sleep patterns and behaviours (1 to 2 years) – From approximately 12 months of age, toddlers tend to sleep better.
      

        Typical sleep behaviour – (5) toddlers 2 to 3 years – Between the ages of 2 and 3 years, toddlers often sleep 12 to 13 hours in a 24-hour period.
      

        Typical sleep behaviour – (6) preschoolers 3 to 5 years – Preschoolers aged between three and five years sleep between 10 to 13 hours in a 24-hour period. 
      

        Preventing sleep concerns (7) – babies 0 to 6 months – To strengthen the bond with your baby as they grow, you need to provide lots of love, attention and different experiences.
      

        Preventing sleep concerns (8) – babies 6 to 12 months – To strengthen the bond with your baby as they grow, you need to provide lots of love, attention and different experiences.
      

        Preventing sleep concerns (9) – toddlers 1 to 3 years – To strengthen the bond with your baby as they grow, you need to provide lots of love, attention and different experiences.
      

        Solutions to sleep concerns (13) – preschoolers 3 to 5 years – It can be difficult to know whether your preschooler is experiencing a sleep or settling concern.
      

        Preventing sleep concerns (10) – preschoolers 3 to 5 years – It is important that your preschooler feels secure and loved. You can do this by responding to them in a warm and positive way.
      

        Solutions to sleep concerns (11) - babies 6-12 months - If your baby’s sleeping patterns are not affecting you or your family and you have strategies that work, then you do not have a sleep concern. 
      

        Solutions to sleep concerns (12) – toddlers 1 to 3 years – It can be difficult to know whether your toddler is experiencing a sleep or settling concern. 
      

        Self-care and support for parents and carers of young children (14) – The birth of a baby is a very exciting, happy and rewarding time your life.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        Hypertension, or high blood pressure, can increase your risk of heart attack, kidney failure and stroke.
      

        Men with diabetes are more prone to problems with erectile dysfunction or impotence.
      

        Diabetic coma is a medical emergency and needs prompt medical treatment.
      

        Diabetes is the most common cause of neuropathy
      

        Without treatment, diabetic retinopathy can cause loss of vision and blindness.
      

        Risk factors for heart disease include smoking, diabetes, obesity, family history and age.
      

        Hypoglycaemia refers to symptoms caused by low blood glucose. The most common reason for hypoglycaemia is diabetes medication.
      

        You can lose up to 90 per cent of kidney function before you even feel sick.
      

        This video from Diabetes Australia – Victoria explores managing your diabetes 
      

        When you have diabetes you need to take care of your feet every day. This video from Diabetes Australia – Victoria explores footcare and diabetes.
      

        Peripheral vascular disease is the reduced circulation of blood to a body part (other than the brain or heart).
      

        For some people with a family history of type 2 diabetes, diagnosis in later life doesn’t come as a surprise. Others can go for years without realising that they are living with the condition.   Symptoms of type 2 diabetes can vary from person to person, but can include: tiredness, persistent thirst, frequent urination, numbness.   In this video clip, participants explain what their life was like prior to knowing they had type 2 diabetes
      

        Diabetes and the build-up of glucose (sugar) in the blood can cause serious complications if left untreated.
      

        It may take a while to find the right insulin dose to reduce your blood glucose to acceptable levels.
      

        This video from Diabetes Australia – Victoria explores managing your diabetes 
      

        When you have diabetes you need to take care of your feet every day. This video from Diabetes Australia – Victoria explores footcare and diabetes.
      

        For some people with a family history of type 2 diabetes, diagnosis in later life doesn’t come as a surprise. Others can go for years without realising that they are living with the condition.   Symptoms of type 2 diabetes can vary from person to person, but can include: tiredness, persistent thirst, frequent urination, numbness.   In this video clip, participants explain what their life was like prior to knowing they had type 2 diabetes
      

        Good foot care and regular check-ups can help people with diabetes avoid foot problems.
      

        Many parents worry when their child with diabetes starts or returns to school.
      

        The risk of most diabetes-related complications can be reduced.
      

        Exercise is an important lifestyle choice for everyone. For people with diabetes or at risk of diabetes, exercise is still an important part of a healthy lifestyle. 
      

        Healthy eating for people with diabetes is no different than for everyone else.
      

        People with diabetes have a higher risk of tooth and gum problems.
      

        This video from Diabetes Australia – Victoria explores managing your diabetes 
      

        When you have diabetes you need to take care of your feet every day. This video from Diabetes Australia – Victoria explores footcare and diabetes.
      

        For some people with a family history of type 2 diabetes, diagnosis in later life doesn’t come as a surprise. Others can go for years without realising that they are living with the condition.   Symptoms of type 2 diabetes can vary from person to person, but can include: tiredness, persistent thirst, frequent urination, numbness.   In this video clip, participants explain what their life was like prior to knowing they had type 2 diabetes
      

        Gestational diabetes is diabetes that occurs during pregnancy and usually disappears when the pregnancy is over.
      

        Pre-diabetes has no symptoms or warning signs, and is a risk factor for developing type 2 diabetes.
      

        Type 1 diabetes can affect anyone of any age, but is more common in people under 30 years.
      

        Type 2 diabetes may be prevented, but it cannot be cured.
      

        This video from Diabetes Australia – Victoria explores managing your diabetes 
      

        For some people with a family history of type 2 diabetes, diagnosis in later life doesn’t come as a surprise. Others can go for years without realising that they are living with the condition.   Symptoms of type 2 diabetes can vary from person to person, but can include: tiredness, persistent thirst, frequent urination, numbness.   In this video clip, participants explain what their life was like prior to knowing they had type 2 diabetes
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        The symptoms of Huntington's disease usually, but not always, first appear when the person is approaching middle age.
      

        Weight loss is often associated with Huntington's disease, but it doesn?t appear to be a direct result of diet.
      

        Motor neurone disease (MND) is also called amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and Lou Gehrig's disease. MND is a rapidly progressing, neurological disease. Motor neurones are nerve cells that control the voluntary muscles of the trunk and limbs, and affect speech, swallowing and breathing. Damage to these nerves causes muscle weakness and wasting. People with MND become increasingly disabled, and may lose speech, have difficulty swallowing and eventually die from respiratory (breathing) failure.
      

        People with motor neurone disease can keep some independence and quality of life with the right help.
      

        A person with motor neurone disease may have difficulty with everyday items in their home.
      

        Problems using the toilet and bathroom can be stressful for both the person with motor neurone disease and their carer.
      

        Recreation and leisure are very important for everyone, especially for people with limited activity.
      

        Multiple sclerosis is not contagious, but it is progressive and unpredictable.
      

        Common symptoms of multiple sclerosis can be eased with medications, therapies and self-help strategies.
      

        Folic acid taken before conception, and during at least the first 4 weeks of pregnancy, can prevent around 7 out of 10 cases of neural tube defects.
      

        The combination of the nervous system and muscles is known as the neuromuscular system.
      

        Cerebral palsy affects people in different ways some people experience minor motor skill problems, while others may be totally physically dependent
      

        Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease is the most common inherited disorder affecting the peripheral nervous system.
      

        Essential tremor causes involuntary shaking or trembling of particular parts of the body, usually the head and hands, but it is not Parkinson's disease.
      

        To the casual observer, a person with Friedreich's ataxia may seem to be drunk.
      

        If you have a child with a disability you can help improve their communication and movement by encouraging them to take part in daily activities.
      

        Kennedy's disease is a rare inherited neuromuscular disorder that causes progressive weakening and wasting of the muscles, particularly the arms and legs.
      

        People affected by muscular dystrophy have different degrees of independence, mobility and carer needs.
      

        Myasthenia gravis is an autoimmune disease that causes muscle weakness.
      

        Polio is a serious disease that can cause life-threatening paralysis and possibly death.
      

        Restless legs syndrome has been described as a type of cramp, soreness or a creeping, crawling feeling.
      

        People with Rett syndrome have a keen desire to communicate.
      

        Milder forms of Tourette syndrome can be misdiagnosed, as it often occurs at the same time as attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and other disorders.
      

        People with Parkinson's disease can help manage their symptoms through medication and support.
      

        Constipation is a common complication of Parkinson's disease.
      

        Communication is the best remedy for all types of relationship problems, including sexual problems caused by Parkinson?s disease.
      

        Folate can prevent up to 70 per cent of spina bifida cases if taken daily for one month before conception and during the first three months of pregnancy.
      

        A child with spinal muscular atrophy type 1 rarely lives beyond three years of age.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        Acupuncture is part of traditional Chinese medicine and consists of inserting fine needles into specific points on the skin.
      

        Ayurveda is an ancient healing system from India that uses a range of techniques to treat illness and encourage wellbeing.
      

        The principles of Traditional Chinese Medicine are very different from traditional Western notions about health, illness and the workings of the body.
      

        Chiropractic treatment can be clinically effective for many problems of the skeleton and muscles, such as back pain and headache.
      

        Complementary therapies aim to treat the whole person, not just the symptoms of disease.
      

        Some herbs have potent ingredients and should be treated with the same care and respect as pharmaceutical drugs.
      

        Homeopathy is a form of alternative medicine that claims to stimulate and strengthen the body?s ability to heal itself.
      

        The supply and use of Kambo was banned in Australia on 1 October 2021.  
      

        Kinesiology uses muscle monitoring to look at imbalances that may be causing disease in the body.
      

        Menopause is when you have your final period. There are different ways to manage menopausal symptoms, depending on their severity. 
      

        Naturopathy uses a range of treatments to stimulate your body's own healing powers.
      

        Osteopathy recognises the importance of the musculoskeletal system to a person?s health and wellbeing.
      

        Reflexology is massage of the feet that aims to promote healing in other areas of the body.
      

        Reiki is a natural form of therapy that uses non-invasive gentle touch to promote feelings of wellbeing.
      

        The Alexander technique stresses that movement should be economical and needs only the minimum amount of energy and effort.
      

        Bowen is a holistic remedial body technique that works on the soft connective tissue (fascia) of the body. Bowen therapy can be used to treat musculoskeletal or related neurological problems including acute sports injuries and chronic or organic conditions. It is gentle and relaxing and does not use forceful manipulation. 
      

        One of the immediate benefits of massage is a feeling of deep relaxation and calm.
      

        Myotherapy is a form of physical therapy used to treat or prevent soft tissue pain and restricted joint movement.
      

        Pilates is a safe and effective method of rehabilitation and exercise that focuses on muscular balance, improves strength and flexibility.
      

        The health benefits of regular yoga practice may include lowering blood pressure, improved posture and circulation, and a sense of wellbeing.
      

        The different smells and chemical constituents of aromatherapy oils can produce different emotional and physiological reactions.
      

        The principles of Traditional Chinese Medicine are very different from traditional Western notions about health, illness and the workings of the body.
      

        Tell your healthcare professionals about all medicines you take, including complementary medicines.
      

        Using products bought from online sites can be risky. Watch out for scams or quackery and don't self-diagnose or self-medicate. Always seek advice from your doctor.
      

        The supply and use of Kambo was banned in Australia on 1 October 2021.  
      

        Vitamin and mineral supplements are frequently misused and taken without professional advice. Find out more about vitamin and mineral supplements and where to get advice.
      

        Vitamins and minerals are organic compounds that are required in very small amounts, for a variety of metabolic processes.
      

        You can't be hypnotised into doing things against your will or forced into a hypnotic state.
      

        Meditation techniques can promote a sense of calm and heightened awareness.
      

        People of all ages and fitness levels can practice tai chi and may gain health benefits.
      

        Tell your healthcare professionals about all medicines you take, including complementary medicines.
      

        Using products bought from online sites can be risky. Watch out for scams or quackery and don't self-diagnose or self-medicate. Always seek advice from your doctor.
      

        Complementary therapies aim to treat the whole person, not just the symptoms of disease.
      

        When choosing a complementary therapist, think about your goals and ask your medical doctor for a recommendation.
      

        Complementary therapies are not always safer than conventional medical treatments, even if they seem more 'natural'.
      

        Complementary medicines can interact with pharmaceutical medicines.
      

        It is important that you tell your doctor about any complementary medicine products and therapies you are using.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        Cortisol helps to maintain blood pressure, immune function and the body's anti-inflammatory processes.
      

        Hormones can be thought of as chemical messages that communicate with the body and bring about changes.
      

        Your metabolism is influenced by your age, gender, muscle-to-fat ratio, the food you eat, physical activity and hormone function.
      

        The hormones leptin, insulin, oestrogens, androgens and growth hormone are factors in obesity.
      

        Acromegaly is caused by an excess of growth hormone in adults, which causes the overgrowth of bones in the face, hands, feet and internal organs.
      

        Some athletes and bodybuilders wrongly believe that taking synthetic growth hormone will help build up their muscles.
      

        Generally, pituitary tumours are benign and slow growing, and pituitary cancers are extremely rare.
      

        Cosmetic genital surgery involves reshaping the labia, vulva or penis to alter their size or shape.
      

        The pancreas helps to digest food, particularly protein.
      

        Pancreatitis is inflammation of the pancreas, which can be either acute or chronic
      

        The effects of androgen deficiency depend on how severe the deficiency is, its cause and the age at which the deficiency begins.
      

        It is the funeral directors job to help with many of the legal responsibilities, including the death certificate.
      

        Menopausal hormone therapy can reduce menopausal symptoms, but the benefits and risks need to be considered carefully.
      

        Information about pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) an infection that affects the female reproductive system. Includes causes, symptoms, diagnosis, risks, treatment, prevention and where to get help. 
      

        New life begins when a male sex cell (sperm) fertilises a female egg (ovum) within the female reproductive system.
      

        Symptoms of a goitre can include enlargement of the throat, swallowing problems and breathing problems.
      

        Good sources of iodine include fortified bread and any type of seafood, including seaweed.
      

        The parathyroid glands make hormones that regulate calcium, phosphorus and magnesium in the bones and blood.
      

        Hashimoto's disease progresses very slowly over many years, so the symptoms may go unnoticed.
      

        Hyperthyroidism can be diagnosed with a simple blood test that measures thyroid hormone levels.
      

        Hypothyroidism means the thyroid gland is underactive which causes the person?s metabolism to slow down.
      

        Anyone can develop thyroid cancer, regardless of age or gender.
      

        If the thyroid gland is overactive or sluggish, the metabolism will be affected, leading to a variety of symptoms.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.
Yoga brings the body and mind together and is built on three main elements – movement, breathing and meditation. Yoga has many physical and mental health benefits including improved posture, flexibility, strength, balance and body awareness.
Always consult your doctor before embarking on any new fitness program, especially if you have a pre-existing medical condition or have not exercised in a long time.
Pilates and yoga are often thought to be one in the same, however Pilates traditionally focuses more on control of movement and muscular endurance as opposed to yoga which connects the body to the mind through flow of movement.
Yoga is an ancient Indian philosophy that dates back thousands of years. It was designed as a path to spiritual enlightenment, but in modern times, the physical aspects of yoga have found huge popularity as a gentle form of exercise and stress management. There are many different varieties of yoga, but each one essentially relies on structured poses (asanas) practiced with breath awareness.
Researchers have discovered that the regular practice of yoga may produce many health benefits, including increased cardiovascular fitness, improved muscular strength and normalisation of blood pressure. Yoga is a renowned antidote to stress and promotes improved sleeping patterns. Over time, those who practice yoga report lower levels of stress, and increased feelings of happiness and wellbeing. This is because concentrating on the postures and the breath acts as a form of meditation.
The classical techniques of yoga date back more than 5000 years. The practice of yoga encourages effort, intelligence, accuracy, thoroughness, commitment and dedication. The word yoga originates from the Sanskrit language and means ‘to join or yoke together’. It brings your body and mind together, and is built on three main elements – exercise, breathing and meditation.
The movements of yoga are designed to  challenge flexibility, balance, coordination and strength, increasing your body’s efficiency and overall health. Breathing techniques promote greater mind body connection, improving the  function of body and mind.
Focusing on controlled movement and breathing prepares the body and mind for meditation, with an approach to a quiet mind that allows silence and relief from everyday stress. When practiced regularly, yoga can become a powerful and sophisticated discipline for achieving physical, mental and emotional wellbeing.
There are many different varieties of yoga, each with a slightly different slant. The most popular are Hatha, Bikram, Iyengar, Yin and Vinyasa yoga.
Each yoga posture, or asana, is held for a period of time and linked with controlled breathing. Generally, a yoga session begins with gentle asanas and works up to more vigorous or challenging postures. A full yoga session should move every part of your body and should include pranayama (breath control practices), relaxation and meditation.
The different postures or asanas include:
The practice of yoga asanas develops strength and flexibility, while soothing your nerves and calming your mind. The asanas affect the muscles, joints and skin, and the whole body – glands, nerves, internal organs, bones, respiration and the brain. The physical building blocks of yoga are the posture and the breath.
Health benefits of yoga include:
Yoga is taught in classes, catering for beginners through to advanced participants. It is non-competitive and suitable for anyone, regardless of your age or fitness level. Your yoga teacher should carefully guide and observe you, and modify postures when necessary.
An asana should never cause pain. If you experience pain or discomfort, ease back on the stretch or don’t do it at all. It is important to keep within your physical limits.
If you are a male over 45 years of age or a female over 55 years of age, haven’t exercised for a long time or have a pre-existing medical condition, you should check with your preferred general practitioner or another suitably qualified professional before starting any new or regular exercise routine.
Pre-exercise  screeningExternal Link   is used to identify people with medical conditions or contraindications that may put them at a higher risk of experiencing an adverse event during physical activity. It is a tool to help decide if the potential benefits of exercise outweigh the risks for you and whether you should seek further guidance from an allied health or medical professional.
Yoga classes usually have 10 to 20 people, allowing for individual attention. Suggestions for getting the most out of your yoga class include:

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

Content on this website is provided for information purposes only. Information about a therapy, service, product or treatment does not in any way endorse or support such therapy, service, product or treatment and is not intended to replace advice from your doctor or other registered health professional. The information and materials contained on this website are not intended to constitute a comprehensive guide concerning all aspects of the therapy, product or treatment described on the website. All users are urged to always seek advice from a registered health care professional for diagnosis and answers to their medical questions and to ascertain whether the particular therapy, service, product or treatment described on the website is suitable in their circumstances. The State of Victoria and the Department of Health shall not bear any liability for reliance by any user on the materials contained on this website.

This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        Bleeding may be minor or it may be a life-threatening medical emergency.
      

        Long international flights are suspected of contributing to deep vein thrombosis in susceptible people.
      

        All children with severe haemophilia are given preventative treatment with infusions of blood products before they have a bleed.
      

        How hospitals reduce the risk HIV, hepatitis B and C  - includes blood donation and transfusions, infection control and prevention for hospital workers, patients and visitors and where to get help.
      

        A needlestick injury means the skin is accidentally punctured by a used needle. Diseases that could be transmitted by a needle or needlestick injury include human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B and hepatitis C.
      

        Bleeding from the nose is common in children and is usually not severe or serious.
      

        A subarachnoid haemorrhage is any bleed located underneath one of the protective layers of the brain known as the arachnoid layer.
      

        Subdural haematomas are blood clots formed underneath one of the protective layers of the brain.
      

        A person with von Willebrand disease may have frequent nosebleeds, heavy menstruation or excessive bleeding from the mouth.
      

        The full blood count (FBC) test looks for abnormalities in the blood, such as unusually high or low numbers of blood cells.
      

        A person's blood group is determined by a pair of genes, one each inherited from their mother and father.
      

        Bone marrow is the spongy tissue in the hollow centres of a person?s long bones and is the blood cell 'factory'.
      

        The heart, blood and blood vessels work together to service the cells of the body.
      

        The heart is about the size of a clenched fist and lies in the middle of your chest, behind and slightly to the left of your breastbone.
      

        Lipoedema is a painful, chronic, symmetrical swelling in the legs, thighs, buttocks and sometimes arms due to the accumulation of fat in the subcutaneous tissues.
      

        The lymphatic manages fluid levels in the body, filters out bacteria and houses types of white blood cells.
      

        Donated blood is used to help people who are sick or injured, or for medical research.
      

        Donated blood is screened for blood-borne diseases such as hepatitis, syphilis and HIV.
      

        How hospitals reduce the risk HIV, hepatitis B and C  - includes blood donation and transfusions, infection control and prevention for hospital workers, patients and visitors and where to get help.
      

        Discover the facts about organ and tissue donation, decide about becoming a donor and discuss your decision with the people close to you.
      

        Healthy eating and lifestyle changes can help to manage high blood pressure.
      

        Hypertension, or high blood pressure, can increase your risk of heart attack, kidney failure and stroke.
      

        Low blood pressure is only a problem if it has a negative impact on the body.
      

        Postural hypotension is the lightheaded feeling you may get if you leap out of bed very quickly.
      

        Common causes of fainting include heat, pain, distress, the sight of blood, anxiety and hyperventilating.
      

        Pulmonary hypertension is high blood pressure on the lungs.
      

        Shock is when there is not enough blood circulating in the body. It is a life-threatening medical emergency.
      

        A stroke is when blood can’t get to all parts of your brain and is a medical emergency. If blood can’t get through, your brain can be injured.
      

        A person with amyloidosis produces aggregates of insoluble protein that cannot be eliminated from the body.
      

        An aneurysm may have no symptoms until it is either very large or it ruptures.
      

         Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (GPA),  formerly known as Wegener granulomatosis is a rare condition that targets the arteries, veins and capillaries of the kidneys and the respiratory system.
      

        Henoch-Schonlein purpura causes a purple spotted skin rash which lasts around one to four weeks, and is often marked by relapses.
      

        Most children and many adults with acute leukaemia can expect to be cured, while chronic leukaemia can be successfully managed.
      

        Peripheral vascular disease is the reduced circulation of blood to a body part (other than the brain or heart).
      

        Polycythaemia vera is characterised by the production of too many red blood cells, caused by abnormal function of the bone marrow.
      

        Raynaud's phenomenon can be a sign of a more serious underlying condition, so see your doctor if you experience it.
      

        Thalassaemia is an inherited blood disorder that can cause anaemia or death if not treated.
      

        Smaller varicose veins are usually treated by sclerotherapy ? the injection of irritant chemicals into the affected vein.
      

        Your body needs cholesterol, but it can make its own. You don't need cholesterol in your diet.
      

        Replacing foods that contain saturated fats with foods that contain polyunsaturated and monounsaturated fats will help to lower your cholesterol.
      

        Familial hypercholesterolaemia is an inherited condition characterised by higher than normal levels of blood cholesterol.
      

        If a person habitually eats more kilojoules than they burn, they will have raised triglyceride levels in the blood.
      

        When a person is anaemic, the red blood cells have to work harder to get oxygen around the body.
      

        Haemochromatosis (iron overload disorder) tends to be under-diagnosed, partly because its symptoms are similar to those caused by a range of other illnesses.
      

        Hughes syndrome is thickening of the blood caused by abnormal immune system cells.
      

        About iron and iron deficiency - symptoms, stages, causes, diagnosis, prevention, treatment, who is at risk, daily intake, food sources and supplements.
      

        Porphyria can affect the skin, nervous system, gastrointestinal system or all of these, depending on the specific type.
      

        Thalassaemia is an inherited blood disorder that can cause anaemia or death if not treated.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        Bipolar disorder is a type of psychosis, which means the person?s perception of reality is altered. It is characterised by extreme mood swings
      

        The most important thing is to recognise the signs and symptoms and seek support.
      

        In this video clip, participants discuss the early signs of depression. They also share some of the events that lead up to their diagnosis.
      

        Postnatal depression can happen either a few days or weeks after the birth, with a slow or sudden onset.
      

        Cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) can help you change unhelpful or unhealthy habits of thinking, feeling and behaving.
      

        The most important thing is to recognise the signs and symptoms and seek support.
      

        Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) can be an effective treatment for some types of mental illness.
      

        Recognising that your child has a mental health problem and seeking professional support are important first steps to take.
      

        In this video clip, participants discuss the early signs of depression. They also share some of the events that lead up to their diagnosis.
      

        A case manager or key clinician looks after your interests while you are a client of public (government) mental health services.
      

        A mental health treatment plan explains the support provided by each member of a person's healthcare team.
      

        Having friends and other social connections is good for your health and wellbeing.
      

        Improve your understanding of anxiety and depression, then take action.
      

        Older people are at greater risk of developing mental health conditions because of the cumulative effect of numerous risk factors, including chronic illness and isolation.
      

        Research shows that keeping active can help lift mood, improve sleeping patterns, and increase energy levels.
      

        In this video clip, participants discuss the early signs of depression. They also share some of the events that lead up to their diagnosis.
      

        Self-medicating with alcohol doesn't solve the causes of depression, which is common in rural communities.
      

        The grief felt by family and friends can be deeper when the cause of death is suicide.
      

        Self-harm and self-injury is when people hurt themselves on purpose, usually in response to intense emotional pain or negative feelings, thoughts or memories. 
      

        In Australia, suicide is the leading cause of death for people aged between 15 and 44. We can all play a role in preventing suicide by looking out for possible warning signs and reaching out.
      

        Some mental health conditions are associated with an increased risk of suicide. Protective factors can reduce suicide risk, such as mental health care, counselling and social support.
      

        All suicide threats are serious. You don't have to be a trained professional to help a person contemplating suicide.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.
Yoga brings the body and mind together and is built on three main elements – movement, breathing and meditation. Yoga has many physical and mental health benefits including improved posture, flexibility, strength, balance and body awareness.
Always consult your doctor before embarking on any new fitness program, especially if you have a pre-existing medical condition or have not exercised in a long time.
Pilates and yoga are often thought to be one in the same, however Pilates traditionally focuses more on control of movement and muscular endurance as opposed to yoga which connects the body to the mind through flow of movement.
Yoga is an ancient Indian philosophy that dates back thousands of years. It was designed as a path to spiritual enlightenment, but in modern times, the physical aspects of yoga have found huge popularity as a gentle form of exercise and stress management. There are many different varieties of yoga, but each one essentially relies on structured poses (asanas) practiced with breath awareness.
Researchers have discovered that the regular practice of yoga may produce many health benefits, including increased cardiovascular fitness, improved muscular strength and normalisation of blood pressure. Yoga is a renowned antidote to stress and promotes improved sleeping patterns. Over time, those who practice yoga report lower levels of stress, and increased feelings of happiness and wellbeing. This is because concentrating on the postures and the breath acts as a form of meditation.
The classical techniques of yoga date back more than 5000 years. The practice of yoga encourages effort, intelligence, accuracy, thoroughness, commitment and dedication. The word yoga originates from the Sanskrit language and means ‘to join or yoke together’. It brings your body and mind together, and is built on three main elements – exercise, breathing and meditation.
The movements of yoga are designed to  challenge flexibility, balance, coordination and strength, increasing your body’s efficiency and overall health. Breathing techniques promote greater mind body connection, improving the  function of body and mind.
Focusing on controlled movement and breathing prepares the body and mind for meditation, with an approach to a quiet mind that allows silence and relief from everyday stress. When practiced regularly, yoga can become a powerful and sophisticated discipline for achieving physical, mental and emotional wellbeing.
There are many different varieties of yoga, each with a slightly different slant. The most popular are Hatha, Bikram, Iyengar, Yin and Vinyasa yoga.
Each yoga posture, or asana, is held for a period of time and linked with controlled breathing. Generally, a yoga session begins with gentle asanas and works up to more vigorous or challenging postures. A full yoga session should move every part of your body and should include pranayama (breath control practices), relaxation and meditation.
The different postures or asanas include:
The practice of yoga asanas develops strength and flexibility, while soothing your nerves and calming your mind. The asanas affect the muscles, joints and skin, and the whole body – glands, nerves, internal organs, bones, respiration and the brain. The physical building blocks of yoga are the posture and the breath.
Health benefits of yoga include:
Yoga is taught in classes, catering for beginners through to advanced participants. It is non-competitive and suitable for anyone, regardless of your age or fitness level. Your yoga teacher should carefully guide and observe you, and modify postures when necessary.
An asana should never cause pain. If you experience pain or discomfort, ease back on the stretch or don’t do it at all. It is important to keep within your physical limits.
If you are a male over 45 years of age or a female over 55 years of age, haven’t exercised for a long time or have a pre-existing medical condition, you should check with your preferred general practitioner or another suitably qualified professional before starting any new or regular exercise routine.
Pre-exercise  screeningExternal Link   is used to identify people with medical conditions or contraindications that may put them at a higher risk of experiencing an adverse event during physical activity. It is a tool to help decide if the potential benefits of exercise outweigh the risks for you and whether you should seek further guidance from an allied health or medical professional.
Yoga classes usually have 10 to 20 people, allowing for individual attention. Suggestions for getting the most out of your yoga class include:

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

Content on this website is provided for information purposes only. Information about a therapy, service, product or treatment does not in any way endorse or support such therapy, service, product or treatment and is not intended to replace advice from your doctor or other registered health professional. The information and materials contained on this website are not intended to constitute a comprehensive guide concerning all aspects of the therapy, product or treatment described on the website. All users are urged to always seek advice from a registered health care professional for diagnosis and answers to their medical questions and to ascertain whether the particular therapy, service, product or treatment described on the website is suitable in their circumstances. The State of Victoria and the Department of Health shall not bear any liability for reliance by any user on the materials contained on this website.

This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        Orthoptists assist in the diagnosis and treatment of eye disease.
      

        Wearing eye protection appropriate for the task can significantly reduce the risk of injury.
      

        Regular eye tests or check-ups detect problems early, so you can have early treatment to minimise any permanent damage to your eyes.
      

        You can help prevent dry eyes and minimise the risk of tired or sore eyes while reading or using a computer.
      

        A person with vision loss needs to make adaptations in order to do some everyday activities.
      

        The eye's complicated design means that an image can pass through its many layers and end up crisply focused on the retina.
      

        If you are short-sighted, you will have trouble seeing objects clearly in the distance and they will appear blurry.
      

        Smoking is thought to be a factor in age-related macular degeneration and blindness.
      

        Blepharospasm means involuntary twitching, blinking, closure or squeezing of the eyelids.
      

        A cataract of the eye is like the lens of a camera becoming fogged up.
      

        People who are colourblind usually have difficulty with the colours green, yellow, orange and red
      

        Conjunctivitis is an eye infection caused by a bacteria or virus. Symptoms include eye redness, a discharge and swollen lids. Conjunctivitis is treated with antibacterial eye drops or ointment. Children must not attend school or child care if they have conjunctivitis.
      

        Without treatment, diabetic retinopathy can cause loss of vision and blindness.
      

        Giant cell arteritis is inflammation of the arteries that can cause sudden blindness in one or both eyes.
      

        Glaucoma can happen at any age and without early detection can lead to permanent vision loss and blindness.
      

        Optic neuritis is inflammation of the optic nerve that causes blurred, grey and dim vision.
      

        Retinitis pigmentosa is the collective name for a range of diseases that damage the retina and cause vision to deteriorate.
      

        A clean face and clean environment are the best protection against trachoma.
      

        Iritis can cause vision problems if it is not treated.
      

        A pterygium is a fleshy overgrowth of the conjunctiva that may affect one or both eyes.
      

        If a detached retina is not treated, it can lead to total blindness.
      

        Sjogren’s syndrome can be managed with medications and products such as artificial tears and saliva.
      

        A person suffering from dry eye syndrome does not have enough of the right kind of tears to keep the eye comfortable.
      

        Some eye floaters look like small dots, while others appear like threads or little hairy clumps.
      

        Always wear safety goggles or a face shield when handling liquid or powder chemicals.
      

        Don't try to remove a foreign body from your eye - go to your doctor or hospital emergency department for help.
      

        Some babies are born with a blocked tear duct, but other events, including infection and trauma to the nose, can cause a blocked tear duct.
      

        Flash burns are like sunburn in the eye and can affect both your eyes. Find out more.
      

        Styes may be red and sore, but they generally do not cause any damage to the eye or eyelids.
      

        Braille is a reading and writing system for blind and vision impaired people, made up of raised dots that can be ?read? by touch.
      

        A person with vision loss needs to make adaptations in order to do some everyday activities.
      

        Guide dogs are intelligent animals that thrive on the challenge of helping their handlers.
      

        Occupational therapy for people with vision impairment offers new strategies and alternative ways to do things.
      

        When you meet a person who is blind or has low vision, ask them if they want help.
      

        Many recreational activities can be reworked to suit a person who is blind or has low vision.
      

        There are many ways to improve home safety for people whose vision is deteriorating
      

        With planning and preparation, most social events can be adapted to suit people with vision loss.
      

        Guide dogs are specially bred and trained to enable people who are blind or vision impaired to achieve freedom and independence.
      

        Many sports can be adapted to suit people who are blind or have low vision.
      

        Corneal transplant surgery would not be possible without generous donors and their families, who have donated corneal tissue so that others may see.
      

        Orthoptists assist in the diagnosis and treatment of eye disease.
      

        Proper care of your contact lenses will help avoid irritation or damage to your eyes.
      

        During laser eye surgery, a computer-controlled laser is used to remove microscopic amounts of tissue from the front surface of the eye.
      

        Vision therapy is effective for everyone; however, its impact is greatest in children and young adults.
      

        Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a type of vision loss where there is a distortion or absence of the central field of vision.
      

        A person with vision loss needs to make adaptations in order to do some everyday activities.
      

        A significant amount of long-sightedness can lead to blurred vision, particularly for close objects.
      

        Refractive errors are common eye disorders causing blurry vision and are related to the focusing ability of your eyes.
      

        If you are short-sighted, you will have trouble seeing objects clearly in the distance and they will appear blurry.
      

        Neurological vision impairment (ABI VI) is vision loss caused by damage to the areas of the brain that are responsible for sight.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.
Please read these Terms and conditions of use (‘Terms’) carefully before using the Better Health Channel website at  www.betterhealth.vic.gov.auExternal Link   (‘Better Health Channel’).
In these Terms, "you" and "your(s)" refer to the person or organisation accessing and using the Better Health Channel website. "We", "us" and "our" refer to the State of Victoria, Australia, including the Victorian Department of Healths and the Better Health Channel.
 Better Health Channel
 Department of Health
 50 Lonsdale Street
 Melbourne Vic 3000
 Australia
Please read these Terms and conditions of use (‘Terms’) carefully before using the Better Health Channel website at  www.betterhealth.vic.gov.auExternal Link   (‘Better Health Channel’).
In these Terms, "you" and "your(s)" refer to the person or organisation accessing and using the Better Health Channel website. "We", "us" and "our" refer to the State of Victoria, Australia, including the Victorian Department of Healths and the Better Health Channel.
 Better Health Channel
 Department of Health
 50 Lonsdale Street
 Melbourne Vic 3000
 Australia
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        Advance care plan personal stories
      

        Some people prefer having palliative care at home because of the familiar environment, feeling of independence and close access to family, friends and the local community.
      

        Some people prefer having palliative care at home because of the familiar environment, feeling of independence and close access to family, friends and the local community.
      

        Palliative care for children provides physical, emotional, social and spiritual support to newborns, infants, children and young people with a life-limiting condition and their families.  
      

        If you are terminally ill, there is financial support available for your care, health expenses and other everyday expenses.
      

        You can appoint someone to be your medical power of attorney, also known as ‘enduring power of attorney (medical treatment)’, to make medical decisions on your behalf when, in certain circumstances, you can’t.
      

        Palliative care - personal stories
      

        If you have preferences about how and where you want to die, it is important that you tell your carers, family, friends and healthcare professionals
      

        You have the right to ask a doctor for a second opinion if you are unsure about your doctor's suggested medical treatment or a diagnosis.
      

        When someone dies, it will help you to have a written plan of what you need to do including who you need to contact.
      

        It is important for the family members of someone who is facing the end of their life to respect their wishes and follow through with the requests of their loved one as much as is practical and possible
      

        Palliative care for children provides physical, emotional, social and spiritual support to newborns, infants, children and young people with a life-limiting condition and their families.  
      

        People who have support from family and friends are less likely to suffer poor health after bereavement and loss.
      

        It can be difficult to talk to a child about death, but it is important to be honest with them.
      

        It is important that you make as much quality time as possible to spend with those you love and that you talk to them about dying.
      

        When someone dies, it will help you to have a written plan of what you need to do including who you need to contact.
      

        Some people prefer having palliative care at home because of the familiar environment, feeling of independence and close access to family, friends and the local community.
      

        Palliative care for children provides physical, emotional, social and spiritual support to newborns, infants, children and young people with a life-limiting condition and their families.  
      

        End of life and palliative care is based on person-centred and holistic care. Talk with your family, close friends, doctor and your palliative care team about what they can do to help you to make the most of each day.
      

        Some people prefer having palliative care at home because of the familiar environment, feeling of independence and close access to family, friends and the local community.
      

        Some people prefer having palliative care at home because of the familiar environment, feeling of independence and close access to family, friends and the local community.
      

        It is important for the family members of someone who is facing the end of their life to respect their wishes and follow through with the requests of their loved one as much as is practical and possible
      

        Palliative care for children provides physical, emotional, social and spiritual support to newborns, infants, children and young people with a life-limiting condition and their families.  
      

        If you are living with a life-limiting illness, end of life and palliative care services can be provided to you at home. 
      

        End of life and palliative care for Victorians living with a disability can be provided at home, in specialist disability accommodation, in residential aged care or in an inpatient facility at a hospital.
      

        There are culturally sensitive palliative care services that will help you and your family.
      

        There are end of life and palliative care services that provide safe, inclusive care for people who identify as LGBTIQA+.
      

        There are culturally sensitive palliative care services that will help you and your family.
      

        Advance care plan personal stories
      

        Some people prefer having palliative care at home because of the familiar environment, feeling of independence and close access to family, friends and the local community.
      

        Carers Victoria provides information and advice to carers and  their families about carer supports and services.
      

        Some people prefer having palliative care at home because of the familiar environment, feeling of independence and close access to family, friends and the local community.
      

        Palliative care for children provides physical, emotional, social and spiritual support to newborns, infants, children and young people with a life-limiting condition and their families.  
      

        Some people prefer having palliative care at home because of the familiar environment, feeling of independence and close access to family, friends and the local community.
      

        End of life and palliative care is based on person-centred and holistic care. Talk with your family, close friends, doctor and your palliative care team about what they can do to help you to make the most of each day.
      

        Palliative care - personal stories
      

        It is okay to speak up and make a complaint if you think something is wrong with the service being provided.
      

        Palliative care information and advice is available from Palliative Care Victoria
      

        Some people prefer having palliative care at home because of the familiar environment, feeling of independence and close access to family, friends and the local community.
      

        Some people prefer having palliative care at home because of the familiar environment, feeling of independence and close access to family, friends and the local community.
      

        It is important for the family members of someone who is facing the end of their life to respect their wishes and follow through with the requests of their loved one as much as is practical and possible
      

        Find out how you can access palliative care for medical treatment, emotional support and practical help to maintain your quality of life for as long as your condition allows. 
      

        Some people prefer having palliative care at home because of the familiar environment, feeling of independence and close access to family, friends and the local community.
      

        Some people prefer having palliative care at home because of the familiar environment, feeling of independence and close access to family, friends and the local community.
      

        Palliative care helps improve the quality of life for a person with a life-limiting illness, as well as the lives of their family, friends and carers, through advice, information, referral and support.  
      

        Palliative care for children provides physical, emotional, social and spiritual support to newborns, infants, children and young people with a life-limiting condition and their families.  
      

        End of life and palliative care is based on person-centred and holistic care. Talk with your family, close friends, doctor and your palliative care team about what they can do to help you to make the most of each day.
      

        You can have inpatient palliative care in a hospital or a specialist inpatient palliative care unit. 
      

        Victoria is the first state in Australia to pass voluntary assisted dying laws. The Voluntary Assisted Dying Act (2017) provides a safe legal framework for people who are suffering and dying to choose the manner and timing of their death. 
      

        When someone dies, it will help you to have a written plan of what you need to do including who you need to contact.
      

        The members of your palliative care team may include doctors, nurses, allied health professionals, volunteers and carers.
      

        It is important for the family members of someone who is facing the end of their life to respect their wishes and follow through with the requests of their loved one as much as is practical and possible
      

        Advance care plan personal stories
      

        Advance care plans can help the people close to you and those caring for you to know what is important to you about the level of healthcare and quality of life you would want.
      

        It is important to acknowledge that you will respond in your own way to the news that you are dying. Respect your need to question, your need for silence and your need to talk.
      

        Some people prefer having palliative care at home because of the familiar environment, feeling of independence and close access to family, friends and the local community.
      

        Palliative care for children provides physical, emotional, social and spiritual support to newborns, infants, children and young people with a life-limiting condition and their families.  
      

        End of life and palliative care is based on person-centred and holistic care. Talk with your family, close friends, doctor and your palliative care team about what they can do to help you to make the most of each day.
      

        Planning and making decisions about the end of your life can be a positive experience. It is a good opportunity to reflect on the things that are important to you, and to make arrangements that suit you.
      

        For some people with a life-limiting illness, work can play a positive role in providing a continued sense of identity, independence and ongoing financial security for their family.  
      

        The healthcare professionals in your palliative care team will work together to manage your pain so that you can focus on the things you enjoy. 
      

        Palliative care - personal stories
      

        Victoria is the first state in Australia to pass voluntary assisted dying laws. The Voluntary Assisted Dying Act (2017) provides a safe legal framework for people who are suffering and dying to choose the manner and timing of their death. 
      

        When someone dies, it will help you to have a written plan of what you need to do including who you need to contact.
      

        It is important for the family members of someone who is facing the end of their life to respect their wishes and follow through with the requests of their loved one as much as is practical and possible
      

        Grief Australia provides specialist bereavement services for individuals and families who need help after the death of someone close to them. 
      

        Beyond Blue is an organisation that provides a free online and telephone helpline for people with depression, anxiety or other mental health issues.
      

        Cancer Council Victoria aims to reduce the impact of all  cancers for all Victorians.
      

        Carer Advisory Service provides information and advice to  carers.
      

        The CDAMS provides diagnosis and referrals to those   experiencing memory loss and decreased cognition.
      

        Community health centres operate across   Victoria and offer a range of community health   services to local residents.
      

        DBMAS works to improve the lives of people with dementia  whose behaviour is affecting their care.
      

        EACH Social and Community Health is a health service that  aims to improve community health and wellbeing.
      

        Some people prefer having palliative care at home because of the familiar environment, feeling of independence and close access to family, friends and the local community.
      

        Palliative care for children provides physical, emotional, social and spiritual support to newborns, infants, children and young people with a life-limiting condition and their families.  
      

        Griefline provides counselling and support to Australians experiencing loss and grief.
      

        A haematologist specialises in diagnosing, treating and managing diseases of the blood and blood-producing organs. 
      

        Call Lifeline to anonymously and confidentially discuss any personal difficulties, including suicidal thoughts at any time. Calls can be made at any time.
      

        End of life and palliative care is based on person-centred and holistic care. Talk with your family, close friends, doctor and your palliative care team about what they can do to help you to make the most of each day.
      

        Massage therapy is the manipulation of a person’s soft tissue (such as muscles,  tendons, ligaments, skin, joints, lymphatic vessels or organs) for therapeutic purposes.
      

        My Aged Care aims to help you navigate the aged care system.
      

        The National Dementia Helpline is a telephone information and support service for people with dementia, their carers, families and friends. 
      

        An oncologist treats people with cancer.
      

        An orthopaedic surgeon specialises in diagnosing, treating, preventing and rehabilitating musculoskeletal injuries and diseases, both surgically and non-surgically.
      

        The Palliative Care Advice Service is a phone-based service for anyone seeking access to specialist guidance and advice for those living with a life-limiting illness and those who support them.
      

        A pharmacist is a professional who specialises in preparing and dispensing medications, including medicines, ointments and tablets. 
      

        A radiologist is a medical professional who specialises in using medical imaging technologies to diagnose and treat injury and disease. 
      

        A respiratory physician (respiratory and sleep medicine specialist) specialises in diagnosing, treating and preventing conditions and diseases affecting the respiratory  system. 
      

        Advance care plan personal stories
      

        Immediate family have the right to refuse a hospital post mortem of the deceased and can object to a coronial post mortem.
      

        Palliative care for children provides physical, emotional, social and spiritual support to newborns, infants, children and young people with a life-limiting condition and their families.  
      

        It is the funeral directors job to help with many of the legal responsibilities, including the death certificate.
      

        Grief is a process, not an event – most people will continue to grieve in subtle ways for the rest of their lives.
      

        If you're unsure of how to support someone who is grieving, ask them.
      

        Palliative care - personal stories
      

        It is important for the family members of someone who is facing the end of their life to respect their wishes and follow through with the requests of their loved one as much as is practical and possible
      

        Advance care plan personal stories
      

        Carers Victoria provides information and advice to carers and  their families about carer supports and services.
      

        Palliative care for children provides physical, emotional, social and spiritual support to newborns, infants, children and young people with a life-limiting condition and their families.  
      

        If you are living with a life-limiting illness, end of life and palliative care services can be provided to you at home. 
      

        End of life and palliative care for Victorians living with a disability can be provided at home, in specialist disability accommodation, in residential aged care or in an inpatient facility at a hospital.
      

        Some people prefer having palliative care at home because of the familiar environment, feeling of independence and close access to family, friends and the local community.
      

        If you're unsure of how to support someone who is grieving, ask them.
      

        If you are a carer, for example of a person with a disability or mental illness, or recovering from an accident or illness or an older person with care needs, you need to look after yourself or the demands may wear you down.
      

        Palliative care - personal stories
      

        It is okay to speak up and make a complaint if you think something is wrong with the service being provided.
      

        There are culturally sensitive palliative care services that will help you and your family.
      

        Some people prefer having palliative care at home because of the familiar environment, feeling of independence and close access to family, friends and the local community.
      

        It is important for the family members of someone who is facing the end of their life to respect their wishes and follow through with the requests of their loved one as much as is practical and possible
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.
Yoga brings the body and mind together and is built on three main elements – movement, breathing and meditation. Yoga has many physical and mental health benefits including improved posture, flexibility, strength, balance and body awareness.
Always consult your doctor before embarking on any new fitness program, especially if you have a pre-existing medical condition or have not exercised in a long time.
Pilates and yoga are often thought to be one in the same, however Pilates traditionally focuses more on control of movement and muscular endurance as opposed to yoga which connects the body to the mind through flow of movement.
Yoga is an ancient Indian philosophy that dates back thousands of years. It was designed as a path to spiritual enlightenment, but in modern times, the physical aspects of yoga have found huge popularity as a gentle form of exercise and stress management. There are many different varieties of yoga, but each one essentially relies on structured poses (asanas) practiced with breath awareness.
Researchers have discovered that the regular practice of yoga may produce many health benefits, including increased cardiovascular fitness, improved muscular strength and normalisation of blood pressure. Yoga is a renowned antidote to stress and promotes improved sleeping patterns. Over time, those who practice yoga report lower levels of stress, and increased feelings of happiness and wellbeing. This is because concentrating on the postures and the breath acts as a form of meditation.
The classical techniques of yoga date back more than 5000 years. The practice of yoga encourages effort, intelligence, accuracy, thoroughness, commitment and dedication. The word yoga originates from the Sanskrit language and means ‘to join or yoke together’. It brings your body and mind together, and is built on three main elements – exercise, breathing and meditation.
The movements of yoga are designed to  challenge flexibility, balance, coordination and strength, increasing your body’s efficiency and overall health. Breathing techniques promote greater mind body connection, improving the  function of body and mind.
Focusing on controlled movement and breathing prepares the body and mind for meditation, with an approach to a quiet mind that allows silence and relief from everyday stress. When practiced regularly, yoga can become a powerful and sophisticated discipline for achieving physical, mental and emotional wellbeing.
There are many different varieties of yoga, each with a slightly different slant. The most popular are Hatha, Bikram, Iyengar, Yin and Vinyasa yoga.
Each yoga posture, or asana, is held for a period of time and linked with controlled breathing. Generally, a yoga session begins with gentle asanas and works up to more vigorous or challenging postures. A full yoga session should move every part of your body and should include pranayama (breath control practices), relaxation and meditation.
The different postures or asanas include:
The practice of yoga asanas develops strength and flexibility, while soothing your nerves and calming your mind. The asanas affect the muscles, joints and skin, and the whole body – glands, nerves, internal organs, bones, respiration and the brain. The physical building blocks of yoga are the posture and the breath.
Health benefits of yoga include:
Yoga is taught in classes, catering for beginners through to advanced participants. It is non-competitive and suitable for anyone, regardless of your age or fitness level. Your yoga teacher should carefully guide and observe you, and modify postures when necessary.
An asana should never cause pain. If you experience pain or discomfort, ease back on the stretch or don’t do it at all. It is important to keep within your physical limits.
If you are a male over 45 years of age or a female over 55 years of age, haven’t exercised for a long time or have a pre-existing medical condition, you should check with your preferred general practitioner or another suitably qualified professional before starting any new or regular exercise routine.
Pre-exercise  screeningExternal Link   is used to identify people with medical conditions or contraindications that may put them at a higher risk of experiencing an adverse event during physical activity. It is a tool to help decide if the potential benefits of exercise outweigh the risks for you and whether you should seek further guidance from an allied health or medical professional.
Yoga classes usually have 10 to 20 people, allowing for individual attention. Suggestions for getting the most out of your yoga class include:

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

Content on this website is provided for information purposes only. Information about a therapy, service, product or treatment does not in any way endorse or support such therapy, service, product or treatment and is not intended to replace advice from your doctor or other registered health professional. The information and materials contained on this website are not intended to constitute a comprehensive guide concerning all aspects of the therapy, product or treatment described on the website. All users are urged to always seek advice from a registered health care professional for diagnosis and answers to their medical questions and to ascertain whether the particular therapy, service, product or treatment described on the website is suitable in their circumstances. The State of Victoria and the Department of Health shall not bear any liability for reliance by any user on the materials contained on this website.

This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        Allergies to insect stings and bites range from milder allergic reactions to life-threatening, severe allergic reactions (anaphylaxis).
      

        All medication has the potential to cause allergies but some people can have allergic reactions to specific prescription or over-the-counter medications.
      

        Aspergillus is a fungus that commonly grows on rotting vegetation. It can cause asthma symptoms.
      

        Find out when thunderstorm asthma events take place, risks, symptoms and how to protect yourself and others. What people with hay fever and asthma should know.
      

        Areas around the home that are heavily used, such as beds and upholstered furniture, will have much higher mite populations than the rest of the house.
      

        Asthma triggers are substances, conditions or activities that lead to symptoms of asthma.
      

        The best way to manage latex allergy is to avoid exposure to latex products.
      

        The way to control indoor mould growth is to control the source of moisture.
      

        Pollen allergies cause seasonal hay fever and asthma and can be treated with antihistamines, nasal sprays or asthma medication
      

        Watch Mohamed's story and hear how his hay fever turned to asthma after a thunderstorm asthma event.
      

        Anaphylaxis is a severe allergic reaction that requires urgent medical attention.
      

        Eczema can vary in severity, and symptoms may flare up or subside from day to day.
      

        Hay fever is an allergic reaction to airborne allergens that can occur at any time of the year.
      

        Hives (urticaria) are a reaction to the release of histamine into the skin.
      

        Watch Mohamed's story and hear how his hay fever turned to asthma after a thunderstorm asthma event.
      

        Severe allergic reactions (anaphylaxis) and asthma attacks need urgent emergency first aid. In an emergency, always call triple zero (000).
      

        Allergy occurs when the body overreacts to a 'trigger' that is harmless to most people.
      

        Allergy testing is used to find which substances provoke an allergic reaction.
      

        Many people with asthma find their symptoms can worsen when they are exposed to certain allergens like house dust mite, animal dander, pollen and mould.
      

        The immune system remembers every germ it has ever overcome.
      

        Coeliac disease is an immune disease caused by gluten.
      

        Milk allergy symptoms range from mild to a life-threatening severe allergic reaction. Avoid food containing milk only under strict medical supervision.
      

        Egg allergy is one of the most common causes of allergies in children with symptoms ranging from mild to life-threatening reactions.
      

        The long-term effects of consuming a combination of different additives in our food are currently unknown.
      

        Food allergy is an immune response, while food intolerance is a chemical reaction.
      

        Food labels carry useful information to help you make good choices about food.
      

        Gluten sensitivity can be managed with a gluten-free diet.
      

        Symptoms of lactose intolerance include bloating, gas, abdominal pain and diarrhoea.
      

        Peanuts, tree nuts and seeds can all cause allergies with symptoms ranging from milder reactions to a severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis).
      

        Raw milk is milk that has not been pasteurised to kill bacteria that could be harmful to humans.
      

        Symptoms of fish and shellfish allergies vary and range from milder reactions to a life-threatening severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis).
      

        Severe allergic reactions (anaphylaxis) and asthma attacks need urgent emergency first aid. In an emergency, always call triple zero (000).
      

        There are many ways in which you can transform your home into an asthma-friendly environment.
      

        If you have an allergy, visit your doctor before you travel, especially if you are at risk of a severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis) or an asthma attack.
      

        For unexpected after-hours medical issues, there are telephone helplines, pharmacies, after-hours medical clinics or doctors who can visit you at home.
      

        Allergy testing is used to find which substances provoke an allergic reaction.
      

        Anaphylaxis is a severe allergic reaction that requires urgent medical attention.
      

        Pregnant women with asthma need to continue to take their asthma medication as it is important to the health of both mother and baby that the mother's asthma is under control.
      

        If your child has asthma, the childcare centre or school should have relevant action plans and staff trained to deal with asthma emergencies.
      

        Careful diagnosis of adult onset asthma is important, because the symptoms can be confused with other conditions.
      

        Many people with asthma find their symptoms can worsen when they are exposed to certain allergens like house dust mite, animal dander, pollen and mould.
      

        Asthma triggered by exercise can be prevented with medication and by preparing for exercise and physical activity.
      

        Asthma affects about one in 10 teenagers in Australia.
      

        Before taking your trip, visit your doctor to make sure your asthma is under control well before you leave.
      

        Asthma attacks need urgent emergency first aid. In an emergency, always call triple zero (000).
      

        Asthma cannot be cured, but with good management people with asthma can lead normal, active lives.
      

        Parents and children talk about some of the factors that can cause a child's asthma to flare up.
      

        An asthma action plan can help you take control of your asthma and feel confident managing it.
      

        Your doctor will prescribe the correct medications that can either help to relieve or prevent the symptoms of asthma.
      

        There are many ways in which you can transform your home into an asthma-friendly environment.
      

        Doctors do not have a single test to diagnose asthma so your doctor must understand your symptoms and eliminate other possible causes of your symptoms
      

        Eczema can vary in severity, and symptoms may flare up or subside from day to day.
      

        Find out when thunderstorm asthma events take place, risks, symptoms and how to protect yourself and others. What people with hay fever and asthma should know.
      

        Hay fever is an allergic reaction to airborne allergens that can occur at any time of the year.
      

        Asthma triggers are substances, conditions or activities that lead to symptoms of asthma.
      

        The immune system remembers every germ it has ever overcome.
      

        A Consumer Medicines Information (CMI) leaflet gives you accurate information about the safety of your medication and how best to take it.
      

        Pollen allergies cause seasonal hay fever and asthma and can be treated with antihistamines, nasal sprays or asthma medication
      

        Get the most out of your consultation by preparing for your health or medical appointment. 
      

        The respiratory system takes up oxygen from the air we breathe and expels the unwanted carbon dioxide.
      

        To get the most out of the conversation with your doctor, nurse or other healthcare provider, it is best to be open about providing information and to speak up if you don?t understand.
      

        Watch Mohamed's story and hear how his hay fever turned to asthma after a thunderstorm asthma event.
      

        If you have an allergy, visit your doctor before you travel, especially if you are at risk of a severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis) or an asthma attack.
      

        Immediate telephone assistance is available for all kinds of emergencies.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.
Whether it's health conditions, health services or tips for healthy living, you can find it here.
Be a life-maker. Help make the life of a child – and family – possible by becoming an egg or sperm donor with Public Fertility Care.
To bridge the gap in women's healthcare, we are leading the delivery of a program of work to change the way women’s health issues are treated
Mental Health and Wellbeing Local is a new service that supports Victorian adults to get mental health and wellbeing treatment, care and support closer to home.
The Community Pharmacist pilot allows people to receive some treatments at a local pharmacy without needing to see a doctor to get a prescription.
Getting checked that is. Sex is a normal part of life. If you’re sexually active, get a sexual health check at least once a year.
Oral health resources to help you care for your child or teenager's teeth.
Community transmission is slowing in Victoria, but COVID continues to be a part of our lives. Follow the 6 steps to protect yourself and those most at risk.
Everything you need to know about the pregnancy journey, from conception through to birth.
Food poisoning is caused by eating contaminated food and affects a large number of Australians every year.
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.
Yoga brings the body and mind together and is built on three main elements – movement, breathing and meditation. Yoga has many physical and mental health benefits including improved posture, flexibility, strength, balance and body awareness.
Always consult your doctor before embarking on any new fitness program, especially if you have a pre-existing medical condition or have not exercised in a long time.
Pilates and yoga are often thought to be one in the same, however Pilates traditionally focuses more on control of movement and muscular endurance as opposed to yoga which connects the body to the mind through flow of movement.
Yoga is an ancient Indian philosophy that dates back thousands of years. It was designed as a path to spiritual enlightenment, but in modern times, the physical aspects of yoga have found huge popularity as a gentle form of exercise and stress management. There are many different varieties of yoga, but each one essentially relies on structured poses (asanas) practiced with breath awareness.
Researchers have discovered that the regular practice of yoga may produce many health benefits, including increased cardiovascular fitness, improved muscular strength and normalisation of blood pressure. Yoga is a renowned antidote to stress and promotes improved sleeping patterns. Over time, those who practice yoga report lower levels of stress, and increased feelings of happiness and wellbeing. This is because concentrating on the postures and the breath acts as a form of meditation.
The classical techniques of yoga date back more than 5000 years. The practice of yoga encourages effort, intelligence, accuracy, thoroughness, commitment and dedication. The word yoga originates from the Sanskrit language and means ‘to join or yoke together’. It brings your body and mind together, and is built on three main elements – exercise, breathing and meditation.
The movements of yoga are designed to  challenge flexibility, balance, coordination and strength, increasing your body’s efficiency and overall health. Breathing techniques promote greater mind body connection, improving the  function of body and mind.
Focusing on controlled movement and breathing prepares the body and mind for meditation, with an approach to a quiet mind that allows silence and relief from everyday stress. When practiced regularly, yoga can become a powerful and sophisticated discipline for achieving physical, mental and emotional wellbeing.
There are many different varieties of yoga, each with a slightly different slant. The most popular are Hatha, Bikram, Iyengar, Yin and Vinyasa yoga.
Each yoga posture, or asana, is held for a period of time and linked with controlled breathing. Generally, a yoga session begins with gentle asanas and works up to more vigorous or challenging postures. A full yoga session should move every part of your body and should include pranayama (breath control practices), relaxation and meditation.
The different postures or asanas include:
The practice of yoga asanas develops strength and flexibility, while soothing your nerves and calming your mind. The asanas affect the muscles, joints and skin, and the whole body – glands, nerves, internal organs, bones, respiration and the brain. The physical building blocks of yoga are the posture and the breath.
Health benefits of yoga include:
Yoga is taught in classes, catering for beginners through to advanced participants. It is non-competitive and suitable for anyone, regardless of your age or fitness level. Your yoga teacher should carefully guide and observe you, and modify postures when necessary.
An asana should never cause pain. If you experience pain or discomfort, ease back on the stretch or don’t do it at all. It is important to keep within your physical limits.
If you are a male over 45 years of age or a female over 55 years of age, haven’t exercised for a long time or have a pre-existing medical condition, you should check with your preferred general practitioner or another suitably qualified professional before starting any new or regular exercise routine.
Pre-exercise  screeningExternal Link   is used to identify people with medical conditions or contraindications that may put them at a higher risk of experiencing an adverse event during physical activity. It is a tool to help decide if the potential benefits of exercise outweigh the risks for you and whether you should seek further guidance from an allied health or medical professional.
Yoga classes usually have 10 to 20 people, allowing for individual attention. Suggestions for getting the most out of your yoga class include:

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

Content on this website is provided for information purposes only. Information about a therapy, service, product or treatment does not in any way endorse or support such therapy, service, product or treatment and is not intended to replace advice from your doctor or other registered health professional. The information and materials contained on this website are not intended to constitute a comprehensive guide concerning all aspects of the therapy, product or treatment described on the website. All users are urged to always seek advice from a registered health care professional for diagnosis and answers to their medical questions and to ascertain whether the particular therapy, service, product or treatment described on the website is suitable in their circumstances. The State of Victoria and the Department of Health shall not bear any liability for reliance by any user on the materials contained on this website.

This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

         The long-term effects of stroke depend on which part of the brain was damaged and by how much.
      

        Early treatment and rehabilitation after stroke helps many people to regain a lot of function.
      

        People who have had a stroke talk about the events and emotions surrounding their stroke.
      

        Hypertension, or high blood pressure, can increase your risk of heart attack, kidney failure and stroke.
      

        As part of a Heart Health Check, your doctor will calculate your cardiovascular disease risk score. Your risk score estimates your risk of having a heart attack or stroke in the next 5 years.  
      

        Although blocked blood vessels can cause both coronary heart disease and some types of stroke, stroke is not the same as heart disease.
      

        Tobacco causes more illness and death than any other drug.
      

        Everyone can reduce their risk of having a stroke by making a few simple lifestyle changes.
      

        Stroke is the second biggest killer of Australian women and kills more women than breast cancer.
      

        Stroke is rare among children and babies, but it can occur.
      

        Although blocked blood vessels can cause both coronary heart disease and some types of stroke, stroke is not the same as heart disease.
      

        A stroke is when blood can’t get to all parts of your brain and is a medical emergency. If blood can’t get through, your brain can be injured.
      

        A transient ischaemic attack (sometimes called a mini-stroke) is a warning that a stroke may follow, and requires urgent medical attention.
      

        Stroke is the second biggest killer of Australian women and kills more women than breast cancer.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        Cortisol helps to maintain blood pressure, immune function and the body's anti-inflammatory processes.
      

        Hormones can be thought of as chemical messages that communicate with the body and bring about changes.
      

        Your metabolism is influenced by your age, gender, muscle-to-fat ratio, the food you eat, physical activity and hormone function.
      

        The hormones leptin, insulin, oestrogens, androgens and growth hormone are factors in obesity.
      

        Acromegaly is caused by an excess of growth hormone in adults, which causes the overgrowth of bones in the face, hands, feet and internal organs.
      

        Some athletes and bodybuilders wrongly believe that taking synthetic growth hormone will help build up their muscles.
      

        Generally, pituitary tumours are benign and slow growing, and pituitary cancers are extremely rare.
      

        Cosmetic genital surgery involves reshaping the labia, vulva or penis to alter their size or shape.
      

        The pancreas helps to digest food, particularly protein.
      

        Pancreatitis is inflammation of the pancreas, which can be either acute or chronic
      

        The effects of androgen deficiency depend on how severe the deficiency is, its cause and the age at which the deficiency begins.
      

        It is the funeral directors job to help with many of the legal responsibilities, including the death certificate.
      

        Menopausal hormone therapy can reduce menopausal symptoms, but the benefits and risks need to be considered carefully.
      

        Information about pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) an infection that affects the female reproductive system. Includes causes, symptoms, diagnosis, risks, treatment, prevention and where to get help. 
      

        New life begins when a male sex cell (sperm) fertilises a female egg (ovum) within the female reproductive system.
      

        Symptoms of a goitre can include enlargement of the throat, swallowing problems and breathing problems.
      

        Good sources of iodine include fortified bread and any type of seafood, including seaweed.
      

        The parathyroid glands make hormones that regulate calcium, phosphorus and magnesium in the bones and blood.
      

        Hashimoto's disease progresses very slowly over many years, so the symptoms may go unnoticed.
      

        Hyperthyroidism can be diagnosed with a simple blood test that measures thyroid hormone levels.
      

        Hypothyroidism means the thyroid gland is underactive which causes the person?s metabolism to slow down.
      

        Anyone can develop thyroid cancer, regardless of age or gender.
      

        If the thyroid gland is overactive or sluggish, the metabolism will be affected, leading to a variety of symptoms.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        A kilojoule is a unit of measure of energy, in the same way that kilometres measure distance. 
      

        A kilojoule is a unit of measure of energy, in the same way that kilometres measure distance. 
      

        The nutritional requirements of the human body change as we move through different life stages.
      

        It’s important for kids to eat a wide variety of foods for a healthy, well-balanced diet and to be physically active. Creating healthy habits during childhood helps to ensure lifelong healthy decisions and actions, and build healthy habits into the future.
      

        Crash dieting makes you gain more weight in the long run because it lowers your metabolism.
      

        There are no magical foods, or ways to combine foods, that melt away excess body fat.
      

        Overweight and obesity are essentially preventable diseases.
      

        The hormones leptin, insulin, oestrogens, androgens and growth hormone are factors in obesity.
      

        Always consult with your doctor before choosing any weight management service.
      

        Always consult with your doctor before choosing any weight management service.
      

        A kilojoule is a unit of measure of energy, in the same way that kilometres measure distance. 
      

        Body mass index or BMI is an approximate measure of your total body fat.
      

        Dietitians offer advice on food choices to help people improve their health and general wellbeing.
      

        A kilojoule is a unit of measure of energy, in the same way that kilometres measure distance. 
      

        The nutritional requirements of the human body change as we move through different life stages.
      

        It’s important for kids to eat a wide variety of foods for a healthy, well-balanced diet and to be physically active. Creating healthy habits during childhood helps to ensure lifelong healthy decisions and actions, and build healthy habits into the future.
      

        Your metabolism is influenced by your age, gender, muscle-to-fat ratio, the food you eat, physical activity and hormone function.
      

        Gaining lean body weight is a slow process that takes months and years, rather than days and weeks.
      

        The nutritional requirements of the human body change as we move through different life stages.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        Babies and young children are more likely to develop middle ear infections because they are still building up their immunity.
      

        In most cases, blockage of the ear canal with wax is a harmless event.
      

        The brain uses the inner ear, the eyes and muscles to pinpoint the position of the body at all times.
      

        In its earlier stages, an acoustic neuroma can present similar symptoms to other, less serious conditions, which may delay diagnosis and treatment.
      

        Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV) is a condition characterised by episodes of sudden and severe vertigo.
      

        Dizziness is generally treatable and rarely indicates serious brain disease.
      

        It is estimated that around four out of five children will experience a middle ear infection at least once.
      

        Meniere's disease affects the ear, which is the centre of hearing and balance.
      

        Otosclerosis eventually affects both ears, but the condition doesn?t cause total deafness.
      

        Labyrinthitis and vestibular neuritis are disorders that result in inflammation of the inner ear and the nerve connecting the inner ear to the brain.
      

        Middle ear infections often happen during or after a child has a cold.
      

        Swimmer's ear can be triggered by exposure to water or mechanical damage due to overzealous cleaning.
      

        Tinnitus cannot be cured, but it can be managed with some lifestyle changes.
      

        Deafness is caused by many different events including injury, disease and genetic defects.
      

        Once hearing is damaged, it often can't be restored.
      

        Auditory neuropathy is hearing loss caused by a disruption of nerve impulses travelling from the inner ear to the brain.
      

        If you are unsure how to best communicate with a colleague who has a hearing impairment, ask them.
      

        Many people with hearing loss experience a drop in self-esteem and confidence because of their impaired ability to communicate.
      

        Lipreading can help people who are hearing impaired to cope better with their hearing loss.
      

        The earlier that hearing loss is identified in children, the better for the child?s language, learning and overall development.
      

        A ringing sensation in the ears (tinnitus), or people complaining that you talk too loudly are signs you may need to have your hearing checked.
      

        Like any language, Auslan continues to evolve to meet the communication needs of people who are deaf.
      

        Since adenoids are constantly in the path of germs, infections are common.
      

        People are less sensitive to smells the older they get, and women tend to have a more acute sense of smell than men.
      

        Bleeding from the nose is common in children and is usually not severe or serious.
      

        Polyps are common. A polyp is a small protrusion that grows out of the membranes lining various areas of the body including the nose, intestines and lining of the uterus (endometrium).
      

        If you suffer from sinusitis, it?s important to see if there is any trigger which can be treated.
      

        Croup is a viral infection of the throat and windpipe that causes noisy breathing, a hoarse voice and a harsh, barking cough.
      

        Prolonged exposure to air pollutants, such as dust, can irritate the larynx and cause chronic laryngitis.
      

        Untreated rheumatic fever can lead to serious complications such as rheumatic heart disease.
      

        A person with sleep apnoea may wake hundreds of times every night.
      

        Streptococcal infection group A can cause sore throats (pharyngitis), scarlet fever or impetigo (school sores).
      

        Risk factors for throat cancer include smoking or chewing tobacco, drinking alcohol and Human papillomavirus (HPV).
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        If illness or injury forces you to take time off from work, it can have a big impact on your life. The time it takes to recover full health can change the way you feel about yourself. You can lose confidence, and feel differently about your job and your future.
      

        When asbestos fibres become airborne, people working with asbestos may inhale particles which remain in their lungs.
      

        Low-level exposure to cadmium over a long period of time may cause health effects because cadmium can accumulate in the body.
      

        Wearing eye protection appropriate for the task can significantly reduce the risk of injury.
      

        Q fever is caused by a micro-organism that can be carried by cattle, sheep and goats.
      

        If illness or injury forces you to take time off from work, it can have a big impact on your life. The time it takes to recover full health can change the way you feel about yourself. You can lose confidence, and feel differently about your job and your future.
      

        A person working the night shift is at greater risk of various disorders and accidents.
      

        People who work outdoors are in one of the highest risk groups for skin cancer.
      

        The spread of many pathogens in the workplace can be prevented with regular hand washing.
      

        You can successfully combine breastfeeding with work if you have support from your employer, colleagues and family.
      

        If you are unsure how to best communicate with a colleague who has a hearing impairment, ask them.
      

        If illness or injury forces you to take time off from work, it can have a big impact on your life. The time it takes to recover full health can change the way you feel about yourself. You can lose confidence, and feel differently about your job and your future.
      

        Some industries are more likely to affect a person with asthma because of the triggers in the environment.
      

        Washing your hands with soap and warm water can help stop the spread of infectious diseases.
      

        If illness or injury forces you to take time off from work, it can have a big impact on your life. The time it takes to recover full health can change the way you feel about yourself. You can lose confidence, and feel differently about your job and your future.
      

        A person working the night shift is at greater risk of various disorders and accidents.
      

        Work-related stress causes an increase in sick days and absenteeism, a higher turnover of staff and a drop in productivity.
      

        If you lack the time or motivation to cook, try these tips.
      

        Victorian State Public Health Nutritionist Veronica Graham takes us shopping for the right foods to include in your childs lunchbox. 
      

        Victorian State Public Health Nutritionist Veronica Graham shares three healthy and delicious lunchbox examples for the kids and provides some great food preparation tips to save you time throughout the week.
      

        Research shows that people who exercise regularly have better mental health and emotional wellbeing, and lower rates of mental illness. 
      

        Work-related stress causes an increase in sick days and absenteeism, a higher turnover of staff and a drop in productivity.
      

        Using a computer can contribute to problems of the muscles and joints, eye strain and overuse injuries of the arms, wrists and hands.
      

        If illness or injury forces you to take time off from work, it can have a big impact on your life. The time it takes to recover full health can change the way you feel about yourself. You can lose confidence, and feel differently about your job and your future.
      

        In 2013, 196 people lost their lives due to work-related accidents in Australia. Find out more about your industry and which organisations help to prevent work-related deaths in your workplace.
      

        Using a computer can contribute to problems of the muscles and joints, eye strain and overuse injuries of the arms, wrists and hands.
      

        Even if you’re busy, you still need to find a way to be physically active. 
      

        If illness or injury forces you to take time off from work, it can have a big impact on your life. The time it takes to recover full health can change the way you feel about yourself. You can lose confidence, and feel differently about your job and your future.
      

        The less sitting or lying down you do during the day, the better your chances for living a healthy life.
      

        Work can provide satisfaction, but loss of a job or work-related problems can affect our physical, emotional and mental health.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        Allergies to insect stings and bites range from milder allergic reactions to life-threatening, severe allergic reactions (anaphylaxis).
      

        Children should always be closely supervised near animals and taught how to behave safely around pets.
      

        Bedbugs have highly developed mouth parts that can pierce skin.
      

        If you are bitten or stung by an insect or animal, apply first aid and seek medical treatment as soon as possible.
      

        Body lice can spread from one person to another when the environmental conditions are crowded and unhygienic.
      

        Unlike a bee, which can only sting once (and leaves the stinger behind in the skin), the European wasp can sting repeatedly.
      

        Fleas are parasites that feed off the blood of humans and animals, and can spread infection.
      

        Australia has about 2,000 species of spider but most species are relatively harmless to humans.
      

        In most cases, the bite from a white tailed spider only causes a mild reaction, including itching and skin discolouration.
      

        Ankle sprain is a common sports injuries caused by overstretching and tearing the supporting ligaments.
      

        Common sites for bone fractures include the wrist, ankle and hip.
      

        Immediate first aid for all burns is to hold the burn under cool running water for at least 20 minutes.
      

        Most hot tap water scald injuries to children happen in the bathroom.
      

        A knocked out permanent tooth can survive if it is immediately put back. Do not put a knocked-out baby tooth back.
      

        Always wear safety goggles or a face shield when handling liquid or powder chemicals.
      

        Don't try to remove a foreign body from your eye - go to your doctor or hospital emergency department for help.
      

        Flash burns are like sunburn in the eye and can affect both your eyes. Find out more.
      

        Head injuries can be serious and require urgent medical attention. A hard blow to the head from a fall, knock or assault can injure the brain, even when there are no visible signs of trauma to the scalp or face. Symptoms of serious head injury include wounds, altered consciousness, clear fluid leaking from the eyes or nose, black eyes or bruises behind the ears, vision changes, nausea and vomiting.
      

        There is no specific treatment for mild head injury other than plenty of rest, and not overdoing things.
      

        Mild knee injuries may heal by themselves, but all injuries should be checked and diagnosed by a doctor or physiotherapist.
      

        Even after a plaster is removed, the bone is still healing, so take care for at least another month.
      

        A sports injury may be more severe than you think.
      

        It is important to get the correct treatment for a sprain or strain as soon as possible after the injury to help you recover quickly.
      

        The type of pain felt in the abdomen can vary greatly.
      

        Children may feel stomach pain for a range of reasons and may need treatment.
      

        Bleeding may be minor or it may be a life-threatening medical emergency.
      

        If in doubt about the cause of your chest pain, call an ambulance.
      

        Coughing and wheezing in babies can be distressing for you and your baby, but in most cases symptoms can be relieved at home.
      

        Acute diarrhoea in babies and young children can be life threatening.
      

        Common causes of fainting include heat, pain, distress, the sight of blood, anxiety and hyperventilating.
      

        A muscle cramp is an uncontrollable and painful spasm of a muscle.
      

        Call the Poisons Information Centre on 13 11 26 immediately if you suspect your child has been poisoned, given the wrong medicine or the wrong dose of medicine.
      

        Severe allergic reactions (anaphylaxis) and asthma attacks need urgent emergency first aid. In an emergency, always call triple zero (000).
      

        Allergies to insect stings and bites range from milder allergic reactions to life-threatening, severe allergic reactions (anaphylaxis).
      

        Anaphylaxis is a severe allergic reaction that requires urgent medical attention.
      

        CPR is a life-saving skill that everyone should learn from an accredited organisation.
      

        Don't slap a choking person on the back while they are upright - gravity may cause the object to slip further down their windpipe.
      

        Diabetic coma is a medical emergency and needs prompt medical treatment.
      

        Alcohol, medications, illegal drugs and some herbal remedies can all cause damage if an overdose is taken.
      

        Always disconnect the power supply before trying to help a victim of electric shock.
      

        Good seizure management is an important part of reducing the risks associated with epilepsy.
      

        Head injuries can be serious and require urgent medical attention. A hard blow to the head from a fall, knock or assault can injure the brain, even when there are no visible signs of trauma to the scalp or face. Symptoms of serious head injury include wounds, altered consciousness, clear fluid leaking from the eyes or nose, black eyes or bruises behind the ears, vision changes, nausea and vomiting.
      

        There is no specific treatment for mild head injury other than plenty of rest, and not overdoing things.
      

        Heart attack is an emergency. If you have warning signs of heart attack, get help fast. Call triple zero (000) and ask for an ambulance.
      

        Drugs affect your body’s central nervous system. They affect how you think, feel and behave. 
      

        When using a ladder, make safety matter.
      

        Mushrooms are a type of fungus. Australia has many varieties of wild-growing fungi, many of which are edible. However, a few types are poisonous or even deadly.
      

        Call the Poisons Information Centre on 13 11 26 immediately if you suspect your child has been poisoned, given the wrong medicine or the wrong dose of medicine.
      

        Shock is when there is not enough blood circulating in the body. It is a life-threatening medical emergency.
      

        A stroke is when blood can’t get to all parts of your brain and is a medical emergency. If blood can’t get through, your brain can be injured.
      

        Asthma attacks need urgent emergency first aid. In an emergency, always call triple zero (000).
      

        If you are bitten or stung by an insect or animal, apply first aid and seek medical treatment as soon as possible.
      

        CPR is a life-saving skill that everyone should learn from an accredited organisation.
      

        Some knowledge of basic first aid can mean the difference between life and death.
      

        Your first aid kit should be organised, properly stocked and available at all times.
      

        Exhaustion, hunger and dehydration further lower the body's defences against frostbite.
      

        Heat kills more Australians than any natural disaster. Find out how you can treat and prevent heat-related illness, including heatstroke, heat exhaustion, heat cramp and heat rash. 
      

        The early responses to hypothermia will be moving around, seeking shelter, hair standing on end (goosebumps) and shivering.
      

        You can help reduce your risk of winter sports injuries with planning, preparation and proper equipment.
      

        A blister is one of the body's responses to injury or friction.
      

        A needlestick injury means the skin is accidentally punctured by a used needle. Diseases that could be transmitted by a needle or needlestick injury include human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B and hepatitis C.
      

        Bleeding from the nose is common in children and is usually not severe or serious.
      

        The body begins repairing a wound immediately and the process may continue for days, weeks, months or even years.
      

        Chronic wounds are more likely to heal if they are treated with moist rather than dry dressings.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        A person with Asperger syndrome often has trouble understanding the emotions of other people.
      

        ASD is a complex disorder that affects a person's ability to interact with the world around them.
      

        Autism spectrum disorder is a lifelong condition, but you are not on your own and there are plenty of professionals and groups who can help.
      

        I'm Max and I have autism and that's ok!
      

        We put the "awe" into autism!
      

        An adult with properly managed ADHD often shows great imagination and creative flair.
      

        Untreated behavioural disorders in children may mean they grow up to be dysfunctional adults.
      

        Early childhood interventions help babies and young children with developmental delays or disabilities.
      

        For children diagnosed with a disability, getting the support they need as early as possible will give them the best chance of minimising the long-term effects of the disability. 
      

        I'm Max and I have autism and that's ok!
      

        We put the "awe" into autism!
      

        An adult with properly managed ADHD often shows great imagination and creative flair.
      

        Children with ADHD may benefit from medication or other therapies, or a combination of both.
      

        Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a behavioural disorder, not an illness or a sign of low intelligence.
      

        Untreated behavioural disorders in children may mean they grow up to be dysfunctional adults.
      

        People with borderline personality disorder may exhibit extreme behaviour, such as repeated self-mutilation or taking overdoses of medication.
      

        Children with untreated conduct disorder (CD) are at increased risk of problems including substance use, personality disorders and mental illnesses.
      

        Oppositional defiant disorder is a childhood behavioural problem characterised by constant disobedience and hostility.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        Every person diagnosed with asthma should have an asthma action plan.
      

        Careful diagnosis of adult onset asthma is important, because the symptoms can be confused with other conditions.
      

        Many people with asthma find their symptoms can worsen when they are exposed to certain allergens like house dust mite, animal dander, pollen and mould.
      

        Watch this overview about thunderstorm asthma to be prepared this pollen season
      

        Asthma attacks need urgent emergency first aid. In an emergency, always call triple zero (000).
      

        Asthma cannot be cured, but with good management people with asthma can lead normal, active lives.
      

        Learn about thunderstorm asthma and the 4 steps of asthma first aid.
      

        Doctors do not have a single test to diagnose asthma so your doctor must understand your symptoms and eliminate other possible causes of your symptoms
      

        Find out when thunderstorm asthma events take place, risks, symptoms and how to protect yourself and others. What people with hay fever and asthma should know.
      

        Learn about how a person with hay fever may be affected during a thunderstorm asthma event.
      

        Asthma triggers are substances, conditions or activities that lead to symptoms of asthma.
      

        The respiratory system takes up oxygen from the air we breathe and expels the unwanted carbon dioxide.
      

        Professor McDonald explains thunderstorm asthma
      

        Watch Mohamed's story and hear how his hay fever turned to asthma after a thunderstorm asthma event.
      

        Thunderstorm asthma overview
      

        Pregnant women with asthma need to continue to take their asthma medication as it is important to the health of both mother and baby that the mother's asthma is under control.
      

        If your child has asthma, the childcare centre or school should have relevant action plans and staff trained to deal with asthma emergencies.
      

        Asthma affects about one in 10 teenagers in Australia.
      

        Watch this overview about thunderstorm asthma to be prepared this pollen season
      

        Learn about thunderstorm asthma and the 4 steps of asthma first aid.
      

        Parents and children talk about some of the factors that can cause a child's asthma to flare up.
      

        Understanding asthma triggers for your child can help to reduce the risk of an asthma attack
      

        Exposure to second-hand smoke increases the risk of children developing asthma and provokes more frequent asthma in children with asthma.
      

        Thunderstorm asthma overview
      

        If your child has asthma, the childcare centre or school should have relevant action plans and staff trained to deal with asthma emergencies.
      

        Every person diagnosed with asthma should have an asthma action plan.
      

        It is important to identify any foods or food chemicals that may trigger your asthma, but this must be done under strict medical supervision.
      

        Breathing in other people's cigarette smoke can be harmful to a person with asthma, especially a child.
      

        Watch this overview about thunderstorm asthma to be prepared this pollen season
      

        Before taking your trip, visit your doctor to make sure your asthma is under control well before you leave.
      

        Some industries are more likely to affect a person with asthma because of the triggers in the environment.
      

        Learn about thunderstorm asthma and the 4 steps of asthma first aid.
      

        There are many ways in which you can transform your home into an asthma-friendly environment.
      

        Find out when thunderstorm asthma events take place, risks, symptoms and how to protect yourself and others. What people with hay fever and asthma should know.
      

        Learn about how a person with hay fever may be affected during a thunderstorm asthma event.
      

        Asthma triggers are substances, conditions or activities that lead to symptoms of asthma.
      

        Professor McDonald explains thunderstorm asthma
      

        Watch Mohamed's story and hear how his hay fever turned to asthma after a thunderstorm asthma event.
      

        Thunderstorm asthma overview
      

        Aspergillus is a fungus that commonly grows on rotting vegetation. It can cause asthma symptoms.
      

        Every person diagnosed with asthma should have an asthma action plan.
      

        It is important you discuss your asthma and preferred therapies with both your doctor and complementary therapist.
      

        Watch this overview about thunderstorm asthma to be prepared this pollen season
      

        Asthma attacks need urgent emergency first aid. In an emergency, always call triple zero (000).
      

        Learn about thunderstorm asthma and the 4 steps of asthma first aid.
      

        An asthma action plan can help you take control of your asthma and feel confident managing it.
      

        Your doctor will prescribe the correct medications that can either help to relieve or prevent the symptoms of asthma.
      

        Learn about how a person with hay fever may be affected during a thunderstorm asthma event.
      

        Cortisol helps to maintain blood pressure, immune function and the body's anti-inflammatory processes.
      

        Asthma triggers are substances, conditions or activities that lead to symptoms of asthma.
      

        Professor McDonald explains thunderstorm asthma
      

        Thunderstorm asthma is triggered when there is high amounts of grass pollen in the air. It can result in people wheezing, feeling short of breath, and tight in the chest with coughing.
      

        Watch the video where medical experts, Dr Michael Sutherland and Professor Frank Thien, explain who is at risk of thunderstorm asthma.
      

        Thunderstorm asthma overview
      

        For unexpected after-hours medical issues, there are telephone helplines, pharmacies, after-hours medical clinics or doctors who can visit you at home.
      

        Anaphylaxis is a severe allergic reaction that requires urgent medical attention.
      

        If your child has asthma, the childcare centre or school should have relevant action plans and staff trained to deal with asthma emergencies.
      

        Every person diagnosed with asthma should have an asthma action plan.
      

        Careful diagnosis of adult onset asthma is important, because the symptoms can be confused with other conditions.
      

        Many people with asthma find their symptoms can worsen when they are exposed to certain allergens like house dust mite, animal dander, pollen and mould.
      

        Asthma triggered by exercise can be prevented with medication and by preparing for exercise and physical activity.
      

        Asthma affects about one in 10 teenagers in Australia.
      

        Watch this overview about thunderstorm asthma to be prepared this pollen season
      

        Before taking your trip, visit your doctor to make sure your asthma is under control well before you leave.
      

        Asthma attacks need urgent emergency first aid. In an emergency, always call triple zero (000).
      

        Asthma cannot be cured, but with good management people with asthma can lead normal, active lives.
      

        Learn about thunderstorm asthma and the 4 steps of asthma first aid.
      

        Parents and children talk about some of the factors that can cause a child's asthma to flare up.
      

        An asthma action plan can help you take control of your asthma and feel confident managing it.
      

        Your doctor will prescribe the correct medications that can either help to relieve or prevent the symptoms of asthma.
      

        There are many ways in which you can transform your home into an asthma-friendly environment.
      

        Doctors do not have a single test to diagnose asthma so your doctor must understand your symptoms and eliminate other possible causes of your symptoms
      

        Eczema can vary in severity, and symptoms may flare up or subside from day to day.
      

        Find out when thunderstorm asthma events take place, risks, symptoms and how to protect yourself and others. What people with hay fever and asthma should know.
      

        Learn about how a person with hay fever may be affected during a thunderstorm asthma event.
      

        Cortisol helps to maintain blood pressure, immune function and the body's anti-inflammatory processes.
      

        Asthma triggers are substances, conditions or activities that lead to symptoms of asthma.
      

        The immune system remembers every germ it has ever overcome.
      

        Chronic condition management includes positive lifestyle factors like a healthy diet, regular exercise, good sleep and social support.
      

        A Consumer Medicines Information (CMI) leaflet gives you accurate information about the safety of your medication and how best to take it.
      

        Pollen allergies cause seasonal hay fever and asthma and can be treated with antihistamines, nasal sprays or asthma medication
      

        Get the most out of your consultation by preparing for your health or medical appointment. 
      

        The respiratory system takes up oxygen from the air we breathe and expels the unwanted carbon dioxide.
      

        To get the most out of the conversation with your doctor, nurse or other healthcare provider, it is best to be open about providing information and to speak up if you don?t understand.
      

        Professor McDonald explains thunderstorm asthma
      

        Watch Mohamed's story and hear how his hay fever turned to asthma after a thunderstorm asthma event.
      

        Thunderstorm asthma is triggered when there is high amounts of grass pollen in the air. It can result in people wheezing, feeling short of breath, and tight in the chest with coughing.
      

        Watch the video where medical experts, Dr Michael Sutherland and Professor Frank Thien, explain who is at risk of thunderstorm asthma.
      

        Thunderstorm asthma overview
      

        Immediate telephone assistance is available for all kinds of emergencies.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        If you are bitten or stung by an insect or animal, apply first aid and seek medical treatment as soon as possible.
      

        A blister is one of the body's responses to injury or friction.
      

        Some areas of the body are more susceptible to boils, including the face, throat, armpits, groin and buttocks.
      

        Immediate first aid for all burns is to hold the burn under cool running water for at least 20 minutes.
      

        Most hot tap water scald injuries to children happen in the bathroom.
      

        Since the ulcer gets bigger with time, early diagnosis and prompt treatment of Buruli ulcer can keep skin loss to a minimum.
      

        Cellulitis is a bacterial infection of the skin that occurs most commonly on the lower legs and in areas where the skin is damaged or inflamed.
      

        The symptoms of chilblains are made worse with sudden temperature changes.
      

        Cold sores are blisters around the mouth and nose, caused by the herpes simplex virus.
      

        Cysts may be as small as a blister or large enough to hold litres of fluid.
      

        Exhaustion, hunger and dehydration further lower the body's defences against frostbite.
      

        Impetigo, or school sores, is a highly contagious skin infection that commonly affects school-aged children.
      

        Age, varicose veins, smoking and arterial disease increase the risk of leg ulcers.
      

        Molluscum contagiosum can be mistaken for genital warts or pimples, see your doctor for an accurate diagnosis. More on symptoms, rash, diagnosis, treatment, prevention and where to get help.
      

        Generally, pityriasis rosea is a one-off event - once it has gone, the rash doesn?t reappear.
      

        Pressure sores can be difficult to treat and may lead to serious complications.
      

        Shingles is caused by the same virus responsible for chickenpox.
      

        The body begins repairing a wound immediately and the process may continue for days, weeks, months or even years.
      

        Tinea is contagious and can be spread by skin-to-skin contact or indirectly through towels, clothes or floors.
      

        Warts can be stubborn, so you may need to use more than one type of treatment.
      

        In most cases, we do not know what causes birthmarks. Most are harmless, happen by chance and are not caused by anything the mother did wrong in pregnancy.
      

        Severe blushing can make it difficult for the person to feel comfortable in social or professional situations.
      

        The skin is a good indicator of health - if someone is sick, it often shows in their skin.
      

        Sweat's main function is to control body temperature.
      

        Chronic wounds are more likely to heal if they are treated with moist rather than dry dressings.
      

        Sun exposure, smoking and ageing are the main causes of wrinkles.
      

        If untreated, melanomas can spread to other parts of the body and may be fatal.
      

        Check all of your skin, not just sun-exposed areas. If you notice anything unusual, including any change in shape, colour or size of a spot, or the development of a spot, visit your doctor as soon as possible.
      

        Encourage your child to be SunSmart, whatever their age.
      

        People who work outdoors are in one of the highest risk groups for skin cancer.
      

        The major cause of skin cancer is over exposure to ultraviolet radiation from the sun or other sources, such as solariums.
      

        A suntan is a sign of skin damage ? there is no such thing as a 'safe' tan.
      

        Cosmetic surgery carries risks and, in some cases, the results are not what you may anticipate.
      

        Home tattooing, or getting tattoos overseas, puts you at risk of serious complications that can be debilitating and life-long.
      

        If you want to have your body pierced, choose an experienced, registered practitioner to reduce the risks of infection and scarring.
      

        If you want to get a tattoo, choose an experienced, registered practitioner to reduce the risks of infection and scarring.
      

        Acne is common and can make people of all ages feel embarrassed, but treatments can help if acne is causing distress.
      

        Bowen's disease produces persistent red scaly patches on the skin that are neither sore nor itchy.
      

        Eczema can vary in severity, and symptoms may flare up or subside from day to day.
      

        Erythema nodosum appears as red tender lumps, most commonly on the shins.
      

        Once a person with leprosy begins treatment they quickly become non-infectious.
      

        The severity of symptoms or how a child with McCune-Albright syndrome will be affected throughout life is difficult to predict.
      

        There is no cure for psoriasis, but it can be well controlled with treatment.
      

        Raynaud's phenomenon can be a sign of a more serious underlying condition, so see your doctor if you experience it.
      

        In men, severe rosacea can cause the nose to become reddened and enlarged (rhinophyma).
      

        The most common symptom of scleroderma is a thickening and hardening of the skin, particularly of the hands and face.
      

        Tinea is contagious and can be spread by skin-to-skin contact or indirectly through towels, clothes or floors.
      

        Many age-related skin changes can be reduced with healthy lifestyle choices and good skin care.
      

        Home tattooing, or getting tattoos overseas, puts you at risk of serious complications that can be debilitating and life-long.
      

        Over time, stretch marks lose their bright colouring and become silvery, shimmering lines.
      

        Winter activities such as snow skiing or snowboarding pose a high risk of sunburn.
      

        Even mild sunburn can cause permanent skin damage and may increase your risk of skin cancer.
      

        Bedbugs have highly developed mouth parts that can pierce skin.
      

        If you are bitten or stung by an insect or animal, apply first aid and seek medical treatment as soon as possible.
      

        Body lice can spread from one person to another when the environmental conditions are crowded and unhygienic.
      

        Cradle cap is not contagious and it is not caused by poor hygiene or bad parenting.
      

        Itching scalp can be caused by a number of conditions, including dandruff, seborrhoeic dermatitis and psoriasis.
      

        Fleas are parasites that feed off the blood of humans and animals, and can spread infection.
      

        Hives (urticaria) are a reaction to the release of histamine into the skin.
      

        Most babies get nappy rash at some stage, no matter how well they are cared for.
      

        If you have scabies, your sexual partners and household members need to be treated. More on symptoms, scabies rash, diagnosis, treatment, prevention and where to get help.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        Alzheimer's disease is the most common form of dementia in Australia, accounting for about two thirds of cases.
      

        Dementia is more common in people over 65, but it is not a normal part of ageing.
      

        Studies of the brains of people with Down syndrome reveal that, by the age of 40, almost all develop the brain changes characteristic of Alzheimer's disease.
      

        A correct diagnosis of dementia at an early stage is important for early treatment, support and planning for the future.
      

        Depression makes it harder for a person with dementia to remember things and enjoy their life.
      

        Dementia is not a normal part of ageing and can happen to anybody.
      

        Services are available in Victoria for people with dementia, and their partners, carers and friends.
      

        The most important way to help young people cope with dementia is to talk openly and be willing to listen.
      

        Participating in suitable activities can help a person with dementia to achieve purpose and pleasure.
      

        Helping the person with dementia adjust to residential care can be a new role for carers.
      

        Deciding to place a person with dementia into residential care is a difficult decision.
      

        Caring for someone with dementia who lives alone can be difficult, but support is available
      

        Caring for a person with dementia will become more difficult if the carer is worn down.
      

        Services are available in Victoria for people with dementia, and their partners, carers and friends.
      

        Participating in suitable activities can help a person with dementia to achieve purpose and pleasure.
      

        Providing a calm environment for the person with dementia can help to reduce the impact of changes to behaviour patterns.
      

        Carers need to pay attention to how they present themselves to the person with dementia.
      

        Incontinence may occur in people with dementia for many reasons.
      

        Some people with dementia may not recognise their declining ability to drive.
      

        Planning ahead can make it easier for families and carers to manage the affairs of a person with dementia.
      

        A number of strategies can help encourage healthy and nutritious eating for people with dementia.
      

        People with dementia continue to need loving, safe relationships and caring touch.
      

        People with dementia can forget about washing themselves or changing their clothes.
      

        Safety checks and modifications around the home can help ensure the safety of a person with dementia.
      

        Adopting a 'brain healthy' lifestyle may reduce your risk of dementia in later life.
      

        Physical activity, a healthy diet and mental exercises may help maintain your brain’s functions, including memory.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.
Viewing 1-10 of 2290 results

      1800RESPECT is a national sexual assault, domestic and family violence counselling service.
    

      Did you know deaths from injury and preventable diseases are more common for men than women in Australia? We’ve got some practical, expert advice to improve your chance of living a long, healthy life.
    

      During fetal development, the diaphragm or abdominal wall may fail to properly fuse, allowing the abdominal organs to protrude.
    

      The abdominal muscles support the trunk, allow movement and hold organs in place by regulating internal abdominal pressure.
    

      The type of pain felt in the abdomen can vary greatly.
    

      Children may feel stomach pain for a range of reasons and may need treatment.
    

      A 'tummy tuck', or abdominoplasty, is cosmetic surgery to remove fat and excess loose skin from the abdomen.
    

      Djirra's Aboriginal Family Violence Legal Service program helps Aboriginal people who are experiencing or recovering from family violence or sexual assault.
    

      The following services provide specialised healthcare for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in Victoria.
    

      Some abortion services in Victoria offer reduced fees to students, healthcare card holders and those experiencing financial difficulty.
    
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.
Blood pressure is the pressure of blood on the walls of your arteries as your heart  pumps blood around your body. Blood pressure does not stay the same all the time. It changes to meet your body’s needs and it is normal for your blood pressure to go up and down throughout the day. It is affected by various factors, including body position, breathing, emotional state, exercise and sleep.If blood pressure remains high over a long period of time, it can lead to a heart attack, stroke, heart failure or kidney disease. 
The medical name for high blood pressure is hypertension.  The medical name for low blood pressure is hypotension.
Blood pressure is recorded as two numbers, such as 120/80. The larger number is the pressure in the arteries as the heart pumps out blood during each beat. This is called the systolic blood pressure.The lower number is the pressure as the heart relaxes before the next beat. This is called the diastolic blood pressure. Both are measured in units called millimetres of mercury (mmHg).
It is best to measure blood pressure when you are relaxed and sitting. Blood pressure is usually measured with an inflatable pressure cuff that wraps around your upper arm. This cuff is part of a machine called a sphygmomanometer.
Your blood pressure changes to meet your body’s needs. If a reading is high, your doctor may measure your blood pressure again on several separate occasions before diagnosing high blood pressure.
Your doctor may recommend that you have your blood pressure recorded at home with a monitoring device. This is also known as 24-hour ambulatory blood pressure monitoring and it involves measuring your blood pressure at regular intervals (usually every 20-30 minutes), while you do your usual activities including sleeping.  Your doctor will organise this service if required.  
If you are considering buying a blood pressure device to use at home, it is best to speak to your doctor to see if this is needed. If so, then buy a device that measures blood pressure accurately. See this list of devices that have been approved by the British and Irish Hypertension Society.  
What is considered a healthy blood pressure varies from person to person. Your doctor will explain what your ideal blood pressure is based on a range of factors, including your overall health.The following numbers should only be used as a guide:
High blood pressure usually does not have any symptoms. You can have high blood pressure and feel perfectly well. The only way to find out if your blood pressure is high is to have it checked regularly by your doctor.
Low blood pressure can be  a problem if it has a negative impact on your body or affects the way you feel. Low blood pressure can make people feel dizzy or faint. See you doctor if you think you have low blood pressure.
Get your blood pressure checked every two years if your blood pressure is in the healthy range and:
Your doctor can also check your blood pressure during routine visits.
You should have your blood pressure checked more frequently (such as every 12 months or as directed by your doctor) if:
You can also have your blood pressure checked as part of a Heart Health Check. A Heart Health Check is a 20-minute check up with your doctor (GP) which is subsidised by Medicare. You are eligible for a Heart Health Check if you: 
As part of a Heart Health check, your doctor will: 
Your doctor will then use this information to calculate your risk of having a heart attack or stroke over the next five years. Your doctor will then discuss how you can lower your risk. 
If your blood pressure remains high, it can lead to serious conditions like a heart attack, heart failure, stroke or kidney disease. Your risk will depend on any other modifiable or non-modifiable risk factors you might have. 
Modifiable risk factors are factors that you can change. Non-modifiable risk factors are factors you can’t change. 
Heart attack and stroke risk factors that you can change include:
There are also some health conditions that increase risk:
Risk factors you can’t change include:
Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander Peoples and people from some ethnic backgrounds (South Asian, Middle Eastern, Māori or Pacific Islander) are also at increased risk.
Your doctor will support you to make changes to manage your blood pressure: 
Your doctor may also recommend you take medicines to manage your blood pressure. Even if you need to take medicines, it’s still important for make healthy changes too. 
Tobacco smoking is a major risk factor for heart disease and can increase blood pressure. Stopping smoking is one of the best things you can do to help manage your blood pressure. Every cigarette that you don’t smoke is doing you good. 
The most effective way to stop smoking is with a combination of:
There is also evidence that e-cigarettes can increase heart rate and blood pressure, which may increase the risk of heart disease. If you are ready to quit smoking or thinking about quitting smoking, talk to your doctor about ways to help you give up smoking. You can also call the  QuitlineExternal Link   (Tel. 13 78 48) 
The Heart Foundation recommends people follow a heart-healthy eating pattern. Heart-healthy eating is  importantExternal Link   for managing blood pressure and reducing the risk of heart  diseaseExternal Link  .
This way of eating is naturally low in unhealthy fats, salt and added sugar. It’s rich in wholegrains, fibre, antioxidants and healthy fats.
Check out the Heart Foundation  websiteExternal Link   for a range of resources to help you follow a heart-healthy eating pattern.
For individualised nutrition advice, you can also speak to an Accredited Practising  DietitianExternal Link  .  
Salt is a mineral made up of sodium and chloride. It’s the sodium in salt that is bad for your health. When looking at food labels on groceries, it is the sodium that is listed. 
Reducing the amount of salt  (sodium)External Link   you eat can help to manage your blood pressure. The Heart Foundation recommends five grams of salt (about a teaspoon) as a daily maximum. 
In addition to following a heart-healthy eating pattern, follow these top tips to reduce your salt intake: 
Being physically active is a great way to manage your blood pressure and reduce your risk of heart disease. 
All types of physical activity count.  Walking, cycling, swimming and yoga are all great for your health. It’s important to do activities you enjoy as you are more likely to keep active if you are having fun. It is recommended that you:
Walking is a great activity for heart health and managing blood pressure. Getting involved with a Heart Foundation Walking group is a fun and social way to be active.  You can also register for a free Personal Walking Plan. Visit Heart Foundation Walking for more  informationExternal Link  . 
Alcohol isn’t a necessary or recommended part of a heart-healthy eating pattern.  Drinking alcohol can increase blood pressure and the risk of heart disease.  
If you don’t drink alcohol, don’t start. If you do drink alcohol, the Heart Foundation recommends following the National Health and Medical Research Council’s (NHMRC) recommended levels of alcohol consumption: 
Speak to your doctor for advice and support to cut down on alcohol. 
 MedicinesExternal Link   are available to lower and manage high blood pressure. Your doctor may call them ‘antihypertensives’, (which basically means ‘anti’ – against and ‘hypertensive’ – high blood pressure). 
Medicines for high blood pressure can include: 
These medicines help maintain a healthy blood pressure to improve the flow of oxygen and blood around the body. Some help the heart to pump more easily and efficiently. 
Once you start to take medicines to manage your blood pressure, you may need to take them for the rest of your life. However, the dose of these medicines may change over time. If your doctor recommends you take blood pressure medicines, it’s still important to make healthy choices when it comes to your diet and physical activity. 
If you need to take medicines, your doctor will advise you on the correct type and dose. Two or more different medicines are often needed to manage blood pressure.
Make sure you take your medicines regularly. Some things that may help you remember to take them include:
Take any blood pressure medicine exactly as prescribed. Don’t stop or change your medicine unless your doctor advises you to.

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

        Stopping episodes of recurrent ARF can prevent rheumatic heart disease (RHD).
      

        Allergy testing is used to find which substances provoke an allergic reaction.
      

        A person with amyloidosis produces aggregates of insoluble protein that cannot be eliminated from the body.
      

        When a person is anaemic, the red blood cells have to work harder to get oxygen around the body.
      

        An aneurysm may have no symptoms until it is either very large or it ruptures.
      

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

Content on this website is provided for information purposes only. Information about a therapy, service, product or treatment does not in any way endorse or support such therapy, service, product or treatment and is not intended to replace advice from your doctor or other registered health professional. The information and materials contained on this website are not intended to constitute a comprehensive guide concerning all aspects of the therapy, product or treatment described on the website. All users are urged to always seek advice from a registered health care professional for diagnosis and answers to their medical questions and to ascertain whether the particular therapy, service, product or treatment described on the website is suitable in their circumstances. The State of Victoria and the Department of Health shall not bear any liability for reliance by any user on the materials contained on this website.

This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        Learn about what the symptoms of COVID-19 are, how it spreads and what viral shedding is.
      

        Anthrax is a rare but potentially fatal bacterial disease that occasionally infects humans.
      

        Aspergillus is a fungus that commonly grows on rotting vegetation. It can cause asthma symptoms.
      

        The simplest form of prevention for lyssavirus is to avoid close contact with bats.
      

        Bacterial vaginosis (BV) is caused by an imbalance of the bacteria normally present in the vagina. Includes causes, symptoms, transmission, treatments, prevention and where to get help.
      

        Barmah Forest virus (BFV) disease can cause joint inflammation and pain, fatigue and a rash of variable appearance. A full recovery can be expected. Most people recover completely within six months, although some people have intermittent symptoms for longer.
      

        The symptoms of bird flu in humans are similar to those of regular influenza.
      

        If you are bitten or stung by an insect or animal, apply first aid and seek medical treatment as soon as possible.
      

        Some areas of the body are more susceptible to boils, including the face, throat, armpits, groin and buttocks.
      

        Botulism is considered a medical emergency. If untreated, it may cause death.
      

        Brucellosis is a bacterial infection that is transmitted to humans from infected animals.
      

        Since the ulcer gets bigger with time, early diagnosis and prompt treatment of Buruli ulcer can keep skin loss to a minimum.
      

        Candida is a genus of fungi (yeasts) that live on the skin and inside the human body. Candida auris (also called C. auris) is an uncommon fungus that can cause serious infections. 
      

        Enterobacterales is the name given to a type of bacteria or germs, many of which normally live in your bowel. A well-known member of Enterobacterales is Escherichia coli or E. coli.
      

        Cellulitis is a bacterial infection of the skin that occurs most commonly on the lower legs and in areas where the skin is damaged or inflamed.
      

        A chest infection affects your lungs, either in the larger airways (bronchitis) or in the smaller air sacs (pneumonia).
      

        Chickenpox is highly contagious, but it is generally mild and gets better without the need for special treatment.
      

        Chlamydia is called a 'silent infection' because many do not realise they have it. Includes causes, symptoms, risks, transmission, diagnosis, STI checks, treatment, prevention, notifying partners.
      

        Cold sores are blisters around the mouth and nose, caused by the herpes simplex virus.
      

        Cold viruses are spread by sneezing, coughing and hand contact.
      

        Coughing and wheezing in babies can be distressing for you and your baby, but in most cases symptoms can be relieved at home.
      

        Croup is a viral infection of the throat and windpipe that causes noisy breathing, a hoarse voice and a harsh, barking cough.
      

        Cystitis is the most common urinary tract infection in women.
      

        If an unborn baby gets CMV from their mother, it can cause hearing loss and intellectual disability.
      

        Dengue virus disease (dengue fever, or ‘dengue’)  is a viral disease transmitted by mosquitoes in many tropical and subtropical parts of the world.
      

        Acute diarrhoea in babies and young children can be life threatening.
      

        Diphtheria is a serious bacterial disease that causes severe inflammation of the nose, throat and windpipe.
      

        Ebola virus is a rare disease that can causes severe symptoms and can be life-threatening.
      

        Epididymitis is an infection causing inflammation of the epididymis. All about causes, symptoms, diagnosis, treatment, complications, chronic epididymitis and where to get help.
      

        A clean face and clean environment are the best protection against trachoma.
      

        Activity and nutrition help fight fatigue and put more energy into your daily life.
      

        A febrile convulsion is a fit that occurs in children when they have a high fever.
      

        Listeria infection is uncommon but very dangerous for the elderly, people whose immune systems are not working properly and pregnant women and their unborn babies.
      

        It is important to establish the cause of gastro, as different types of gastroenteritis respond to different treatments.
      

        Amoebiasis can cause diarrhoea among travellers to developing countries.
      

        Campylobacteriosis is a type of gastroenteritis and is more common in children under five years of age and young adults
      

        Outbreaks of cryptosporidiosis have been associated with child care centres, public swimming pools and contaminated water supplies.
      

        Most people infected with Giardia parasites do not develop symptoms but can still spread the infection to others.
      

        You may be more prone to salmonellosis if you are elderly, have another medical condition (such as a weakened immune system) or are malnourished.
      

        Outbreaks of shigella gastroenteritis can occur in institutional settings, particularly where children are still in nappies or adults are incontinent.
      

        Gastroenteritis is common in young children and spreads easily. See your doctor if your child is vomiting often, not drinking, showing signs of dehydration or has blood in their poo. 
      

        Genital herpes is common and may not cause symptoms. More on causes, transmission, symptoms, reinfections, diagnosis, treatment, prevention, pregnancy and where to get support.
      

        Genital warts are a common sexually transmissible infection (STI). About causes, signs, symptoms, transmission, treatment, reinfection, prevention, HPV vaccines, cervical cancer screening and support.
      

        Glandular fever is most common among high school and university students, but young children can also become infected by saliva on toys, shared cups, or the hands of carers.
      

        Gonorrhoea, also spelt gonorrhea, affects both men and women and is transmitted during sex, it may lead to infertility in women if left untreated.
      

        Haemolytic uraemic syndrome (HUS) is a rare condition which can lead to chronic kidney damage or death from kidney failure.
      

        Good personal hygiene is essential to prevent the spread of hand, foot and mouth disease to others, both for those infected and their carers.
      

        Endocarditis is an infection of the heart valves or the inner lining of the heart.
      

        The best defence against Hendra virus is to avoid contact with an infected horse.
      

        Hepatitis is an umbrella term for several diseases that affect the liver.
      

        Immunisation is the best protection against hepatitis A infection and it is recommended for people in high-risk groups.
      

        Hepatitis B is a viral infection that affects the liver and can lead to serious illness or death.
      

        In Australia, hepatitis C is most often spread through the sharing of drug injecting equipment. New all oral combination treatment has greatly improved health outcomes for people with hepatitis C.
      

        All about HIV and AIDS including HIV transmission, how HIV spreads, prevention, symptoms, treatment, testing, letting sexual partners know, reducing stigma and where to get help.
      

        Impetigo, or school sores, is a highly contagious skin infection that commonly affects school-aged children.
      

        Influenza (the flu) is caused by a virus. The flu is more than just a bad cold. It can occasionally lead to serious complications. Immunisation offers protection from flu.
      

        Japanese encephalitis is a rare but potentially serious infection of the brain caused by the Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) which can be spread to humans through mosquito bites.
      

        Labyrinthitis and vestibular neuritis are disorders that result in inflammation of the inner ear and the nerve connecting the inner ear to the brain.
      

        Legionnaires' disease is a form of pneumonia.
      

        Once a person with leprosy begins treatment they quickly become non-infectious.
      

        Leptospirosis is a disease spread from animals to humans, caused by infection with the bacteria Leptospira. 
      

        Travellers who visit malarial locations should avoid mosquito bites and take anti-malarial drugs.
      

        Measles can cause serious and sometimes fatal complications, including pneumonia and brain inflammation.
      

        Immunisation is the best protection against measles, mumps, rubella and varicella (chickenpox).
      

        Meningitis can cause death and requires urgent medical attention.
      

        Meningococcal disease is an uncommon but serious illness that usually takes the form of a blood infection (septicaemia) or infection of the membranes covering the brain and spinal cord (meningitis).
      

        Molluscum contagiosum can be mistaken for genital warts or pimples, see your doctor for an accurate diagnosis. More on symptoms, rash, diagnosis, treatment, prevention and where to get help.
      

        Some mosquitoes can carry diseases that are transmitted through mosquito bites. It is often necessary for landowners and land occupiers to manage mosquito numbers through an integrated mosquito manage
      

        You can reduce the risk of mosquito bites if you get rid of potential mosquito breeding sites around your home.
      

        Mpox (formerly known as monkeypox) is a disease caused by the monkeypox virus. It usually causes a mild illness with a rash. Most people recover within a few weeks.
      

        Mumps is a viral illness that causes fever and swollen salivary glands, and a swollen face.
      

        Murray Valley encephalitis (MVE) is a serious viral infection, spread by mosquito bites.
      

        In Australia, hepatitis C is most often spread through the sharing of unsterile drug injecting equipment. New all oral combination treatment has greatly improved health outcomes for people with hepatitis C. It may also help prevent hepatitis C transmission to other people. 
      

        Osteomyelitis means an infection of bone which can either be recent or longstanding.
      

        Good personal hygiene is essential to prevent the spread of parechovirus to others, both for those infected and their carers.
      

        Pericarditis symptoms may be similar to those of heart attack and include chest pain and abnormal heart rhythms.
      

        People in contact with tropical fish and reptiles such as turtles, lizards and snakes may be at risk of infections and illness due to germs (such as bacteria, viruses and parasites) carried on the animals.
      

        Despite the unsavoury reputation, a pinworm infection (worms) is relatively harmless and easily treated.
      

        Treating any infection of the upper respiratory tract quickly will reduce the risk of developing pleurisy.
      

        Pneumococcal disease is a leading cause of serious illness and death in young children.
      

        Anyone can get pneumonia, but young children and the elderly are most susceptible.
      

        Polio is a serious disease that can cause life-threatening paralysis and possibly death.
      

        PEP (post-exposure prophylaxis) is antiviral medication to prevent HIV infection. Learn what is PEP, what PEP is for, where to get PEP, important reminders about PEP and where to get help. 
      

        Pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) is an oral medication to prevent HIV in people at risk. All about PrEP, what PrEP is for, dosage, where to get PrEP, PrEP side effects, PrEP health checks and support.
      

        People who have birds as pets, poultry workers and anyone working in aviaries or pet shops, are most at risk of catching psittacosis.
      

        Q fever is caused by a micro-organism that can be carried by cattle, sheep and goats.
      

        Rabies is a highly fatal disease that affects the central nervous system.
      

        Reactive arthritis is a form of arthritis that occurs as a result of some bacterial infections.
      

        Respiratory syncytial virus, or RSV, is a virus that can cause respiratory infections that affect the airways and lungs.
      

        Untreated rheumatic fever can lead to serious complications such as rheumatic heart disease.
      

        Roseola is a mild viral infection with associated fever and rash that affects babies and young children.
      

        Most people recover from Ross River virus disease, although some people have symptoms for a year or more
      

        Rotavirus is a common cause of viral gastroenteritis for Australian babies and preschool children.
      

        Rubella is a mild illness for most people, but very dangerous for pregnant women and their babies.
      

        Salpingitis is one of the most common causes of female infertility and may permanently damage the fallopian tubes.
      

        There are many types of E.coli bacteria, most of which are harmless. However, some types of E.coli produce toxins (poisons) that can cause gastroenteritis (gastro). One of these types of E.coli is known as ‘shiga toxin-producing E.coli’ or STEC. 
      

        Shingles is caused by the same virus responsible for chickenpox.
      

        Children with slapped cheek do not need to be kept home from school or day care, as cases are only contagious before the onset of the rash.
      

        Smallpox was once a feared and highly contagious viral disease.
      

        Hospital patients are more likely to be infected by golden staph because of surgical or other wounds.
      

        Streptococcal infection group A can cause sore throats (pharyngitis), scarlet fever or impetigo (school sores).
      

        Streptococcal infection – group B
      

        Styes may be red and sore, but they generally do not cause any damage to the eye or eyelids.
      

        Swimmer's ear can be triggered by exposure to water or mechanical damage due to overzealous cleaning.
      

        It's important for your own health to control tapeworm infection in your dog.
      

        Tetanus is a life-threatening disease and immunisation is the best way to reduce your risk.
      

        Tinea is contagious and can be spread by skin-to-skin contact or indirectly through towels, clothes or floors.
      

        If you think you could have toxic shock syndrome, stop using tampons immediately and go to the emergency department of your nearest hospital.
      

        Problems only occur if a woman becomes infected with parasites that cause toxoplasmosis for the first time while pregnant.
      

        If you are travelling or passing through areas infected with yellow fever, some countries require you to be vaccinated.
      

        Tuberculosis (TB) is spread when a person with an active infection coughs, laughs, sings or sneezes.
      

        Urinary tract infections (UTIs) can target the urethra, bladder or kidneys.
      

        Vaginal thrush is common. All about causes, symptoms, treatment, prevention and what to do if you keep getting vaginal yeast infections.
      

        Viral encephalitis is inflammation of the brain caused by a virus and can cause permanent brain damage.
      

        Viral haemorrhagic fever (VHF) is an extremely infectious and life threatening disease caused by a group of viruses, including the Ebola virus.
      

        Warts can be stubborn, so you may need to use more than one type of treatment.
      

        All disease-carrying mosquitoes breed in water or require water to enable eggs to hatch
      

        The major symptom of whooping cough is a severe cough, which is often followed by a 'whooping' sound.
      

        Williams syndrome often goes undiagnosed, which means that some people with the disorder fail to get the support and treatment they need until later in life.
      

        Zika virus is a mosquito-borne virus. There is no cure, specific treatment or vaccine for Zika virus.
      

        ኮቪድ-19ን ለመቆጣጠር እና ለመከላከል የሚሆን ምክር።
      

        A family shares their experience when their baby daughter contracted whooping cough (or pertussis)
      

        Anthrax is a rare but potentially fatal bacterial disease that occasionally infects humans.
      

        The simplest form of prevention for lyssavirus is to avoid close contact with bats.
      

        Barmah Forest virus (BFV) disease can cause joint inflammation and pain, fatigue and a rash of variable appearance. A full recovery can be expected. Most people recover completely within six months, although some people have intermittent symptoms for longer.
      

        The symptoms of bird flu in humans are similar to those of regular influenza.
      

        Brucellosis is a bacterial infection that is transmitted to humans from infected animals.
      

        Dengue virus disease (dengue fever, or ‘dengue’)  is a viral disease transmitted by mosquitoes in many tropical and subtropical parts of the world.
      

        The best defence against Hendra virus is to avoid contact with an infected horse.
      

        Leptospirosis is a disease spread from animals to humans, caused by infection with the bacteria Leptospira. 
      

        Travellers who visit malarial locations should avoid mosquito bites and take anti-malarial drugs.
      

        Some mosquitoes can carry diseases that are transmitted through mosquito bites. It is often necessary for landowners and land occupiers to manage mosquito numbers through an integrated mosquito manage
      

        You can reduce the risk of mosquito bites if you get rid of potential mosquito breeding sites around your home.
      

        Murray Valley encephalitis (MVE) is a serious viral infection, spread by mosquito bites.
      

        People in contact with tropical fish and reptiles such as turtles, lizards and snakes may be at risk of infections and illness due to germs (such as bacteria, viruses and parasites) carried on the animals.
      

        Despite the unsavoury reputation, a pinworm infection (worms) is relatively harmless and easily treated.
      

        People who have birds as pets, poultry workers and anyone working in aviaries or pet shops, are most at risk of catching psittacosis.
      

        Q fever is caused by a micro-organism that can be carried by cattle, sheep and goats.
      

        Rabies is a highly fatal disease that affects the central nervous system.
      

        Most people recover from Ross River virus disease, although some people have symptoms for a year or more
      

        It's important for your own health to control tapeworm infection in your dog.
      

        Problems only occur if a woman becomes infected with parasites that cause toxoplasmosis for the first time while pregnant.
      

        All disease-carrying mosquitoes breed in water or require water to enable eggs to hatch
      

        Zika virus is a mosquito-borne virus. There is no cure, specific treatment or vaccine for Zika virus.
      

        Some areas of the body are more susceptible to boils, including the face, throat, armpits, groin and buttocks.
      

        Chickenpox is highly contagious, but it is generally mild and gets better without the need for special treatment.
      

        Coughing and wheezing in babies can be distressing for you and your baby, but in most cases symptoms can be relieved at home.
      

        Croup is a viral infection of the throat and windpipe that causes noisy breathing, a hoarse voice and a harsh, barking cough.
      

        Diphtheria is a serious bacterial disease that causes severe inflammation of the nose, throat and windpipe.
      

        A febrile convulsion is a fit that occurs in children when they have a high fever.
      

        Gastroenteritis is common in young children and spreads easily. See your doctor if your child is vomiting often, not drinking, showing signs of dehydration or has blood in their poo. 
      

        Good personal hygiene is essential to prevent the spread of hand, foot and mouth disease to others, both for those infected and their carers.
      

        Impetigo, or school sores, is a highly contagious skin infection that commonly affects school-aged children.
      

        Japanese encephalitis is a rare but potentially serious infection of the brain caused by the Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) which can be spread to humans through mosquito bites.
      

        Measles can cause serious and sometimes fatal complications, including pneumonia and brain inflammation.
      

        Immunisation is the best protection against measles, mumps, rubella and varicella (chickenpox).
      

        Melissa shares her story of how her baby caught chickenpox at 5 weeks old.
      

        Meningitis can cause death and requires urgent medical attention.
      

        Middle ear infections often happen during or after a child has a cold.
      

        Mumps is a viral illness that causes fever and swollen salivary glands, and a swollen face.
      

        Respiratory syncytial virus, or RSV, is a virus that can cause respiratory infections that affect the airways and lungs.
      

        Roseola is a mild viral infection with associated fever and rash that affects babies and young children.
      

        Rubella is a mild illness for most people, but very dangerous for pregnant women and their babies.
      

        Children with slapped cheek do not need to be kept home from school or day care, as cases are only contagious before the onset of the rash.
      

        Streptococcal infection – group B
      

        Viral encephalitis is inflammation of the brain caused by a virus and can cause permanent brain damage.
      

        A family shares their experience when their baby daughter contracted whooping cough (or pertussis)
      

        The major symptom of whooping cough is a severe cough, which is often followed by a 'whooping' sound.
      

        Learn about what the symptoms of COVID-19 are, how it spreads and what viral shedding is.
      

        Careful prescribing of antibiotics will minimise the emergence of antimicrobial resistant strains of bacteria.
      

        A chest infection affects your lungs, either in the larger airways (bronchitis) or in the smaller air sacs (pneumonia).
      

        A mild fever up to 39°C can actually help the immune system to get rid of an infection.
      

        By law, parents or guardians must provide an Immunisation History Statement when enrolling children in any childcare service, kindergarten or  primary school in Victoria.
      

        Mycobacterium chimaera is a type of bacterium known as a non-tuberculous mycobacterium (NTM). There is a risk that heater cooler units (HCUs) used in cardiac (heart) surgery may be contaminated with Mycobacterium chimaera, and that exposure of patients to the exhaust from these units in the operating theatre may lead to the development of a serious infection up to several years post-surgery. 
      

        Many bacterial infections can be treated with antibiotics, but they are useless against viral infections.
      

        Immunisations in Victoria are provided by local councils, GPs, nurses in medical clinics and community health services, maternal and child health nurses, travel clinics, pharmacists and hospitals.
      

        Careful prescribing of antibiotics will minimise the emergence of antimicrobial resistant strains of bacteria.
      

        Enterobacterales is the name given to a type of bacteria or germs, many of which normally live in your bowel. A well-known member of Enterobacterales is Escherichia coli or E. coli.
      

        A step-by-step guide to support you through COVID-19 to your recovery. 
      

        What to do if you're a contact of someone with COVID-19.
      

        Washing your hands with soap and warm water can help stop the spread of infectious diseases.
      

        Learn the basics of infection prevention and control in 6 free online learning modules which are available to everyone. 
      

        Make sure your doctor knows about every medicine you take, including vitamins.
      

        Complementary medicines can interact with pharmaceutical medicines.
      

        There are things you can do to reduce the chance of getting an infection while you are in hospital.
      

        You may be asked to quarantine yourself at home if you have developed, or been exposed to, an infectious disease.
      

        The spread of many pathogens in the workplace can be prevented with regular hand washing.
      

        The Western obsession with cleanliness may be partly responsible for the increase in allergic asthma and conditions such as rhinitis.
      

        Enterobacterales is the name given to a type of bacteria or germs, many of which normally live in your bowel. A well-known member of Enterobacterales is Escherichia coli or E. coli.
      

        A step-by-step guide to support you through COVID-19 to your recovery. 
      

        Face masks can prevent COVID-19 transmission.
      

        Find out how ventilation helps you lower the spread of COVID-19.
      

        Being prepared is the best way to reduce your risk from COVID-19 as an older person, including making a plan to access antivirals.
      

        Information and resources for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Victorians. 
      

        Information about COVID-19 for people with disability and people caring for them.
      

        Find out about travelling to and from Victoria, including both interstate and international advice.
      

        Travelling, eating and drinking go together but unfortunately, traveller's diarrhoea and other food-related illnesses can sometimes come along for the ride.
      

        It is important to establish the cause of gastro, as different types of gastroenteritis respond to different treatments.
      

        Washing your hands with soap and warm water can help stop the spread of infectious diseases.
      

        Home tattooing, or getting tattoos overseas, puts you at risk of serious complications that can be debilitating and life-long.
      

        By law, parents or guardians must provide an Immunisation History Statement when enrolling children in any childcare service, kindergarten or  primary school in Victoria.
      

        Learn the basics of infection prevention and control in 6 free online learning modules which are available to everyone. 
      

        While disease-causing bugs can be transferred during a kiss, most won?t cause disease and the risk of serious disease is very small.
      

        Good personal hygiene is one of the most effective ways to protect ourselves and others from illness.
      

        People in contact with tropical fish and reptiles such as turtles, lizards and snakes may be at risk of infections and illness due to germs (such as bacteria, viruses and parasites) carried on the animals.
      

        If you want to have your body pierced, choose an experienced, registered practitioner to reduce the risks of infection and scarring.
      

        There are things you can do to reduce the chance of getting an infection while you are in hospital.
      

        You may be asked to quarantine yourself at home if you have developed, or been exposed to, an infectious disease.
      

        If you want to get a tattoo, choose an experienced, registered practitioner to reduce the risks of infection and scarring.
      

        How to get a test for COVID-19 in Victoria.
      

        If you are travelling overseas, check with your doctor well in advance to find out what immunisations you need.
      

        Vaccines stimulate the body to produce antibodies to provide immunity against one or several diseases.
      

        Immunisations in Victoria are provided by local councils, GPs, nurses in medical clinics and community health services, maternal and child health nurses, travel clinics, pharmacists and hospitals.
      

        The spread of many pathogens in the workplace can be prevented with regular hand washing.
      

        Immunisation is the best protection against hepatitis A infection and it is recommended for people in high-risk groups.
      

        All about HIV and AIDS including HIV transmission, how HIV spreads, prevention, symptoms, treatment, testing, letting sexual partners know, reducing stigma and where to get help.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.
A joint is the part of the body where two or more bones meet to allow movement. Every bone in the body – except for the hyoid bone in the throat – meets up with at least one other bone at a joint. The shape of a joint depends on its function. A joint is also known as an articulation. 
Generally speaking, the more movement that is possible through a joint, the higher the risk of injury. This is because greater range of movement reduces the strength of the joint.
Joints are described by how much movement they allow. The three broad classes of joints include:
The six types of freely movable joint include:
To achieve movement, the joint may:
Joints are held together and supported by tough bands of connective tissue called ligaments. Smooth cartilage prevents friction as the bones move against one another. In freely movable joints, the entire joint is enclosed inside a membrane filled with lubricating synovial fluid, which helps to provide extra cushioning against impact. 
Muscles are attached to bones with thick, tough bands of connective tissue called tendons. Where tendons lie close to bone, tiny sacs called bursae sit between the tendon and the bone to reduce friction. A bursa is filled with synovial fluid.
Common causes of joint pain include:

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

Content on this website is provided for information purposes only. Information about a therapy, service, product or treatment does not in any way endorse or support such therapy, service, product or treatment and is not intended to replace advice from your doctor or other registered health professional. The information and materials contained on this website are not intended to constitute a comprehensive guide concerning all aspects of the therapy, product or treatment described on the website. All users are urged to always seek advice from a registered health care professional for diagnosis and answers to their medical questions and to ascertain whether the particular therapy, service, product or treatment described on the website is suitable in their circumstances. The State of Victoria and the Department of Health shall not bear any liability for reliance by any user on the materials contained on this website.

This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        The major sources of man-made air pollution in Melbourne are from motor vehicle emissions and wood heaters. 
      

        Water quality of natural water sources, such as beaches and rivers, can vary greatly. Keeping a lookout for poor water quality (such as water that is discoloured, murky or smells unpleasant) will help you decide when it is safe to enter the water. By paying attention to a few noticeable signs, you can keep yourself safe.
      

        Fluoride in your drinking water is like a constant 'repair kit' for your teeth.
      

        When handled properly, greywater can be safely reused for the garden.
      

        Groundwater quality varies across Victoria; in some areas, groundwater is not suitable for use. 
      

        Some types of algae and cyanobacteria (also known as blue-green algae) produce toxins that can harm people and animals when swallowed, inhaled or touched. Do not enter the water at locations affected 
      

        We can keep our pools safe, healthy, and most importantly fun.
      

        Legionnaires' disease is a form of pneumonia.
      

        The way to control indoor mould growth is to control the source of moisture.
      

        Passive smoking means breathing other people's second-hand tobacco smoke. Passive smoking increases the risk of serious illness in both children and adults.
      

        There are simple steps for all visitors to follow to keep pool water clean for healthy swimming.
      

        Not all air conditioners are safe to use when it is smoky outside, such as during a bushfire.
      

        Drinking untreated water, such as creek water, bore water and sometimes even rainwater can lead to illnesses including gastroenteritis.
      

        Make sure your private drinking water supply is safe.
      

        The smoke from wood fires can affect air quality and may affect people's health.
      

        When returning to a flood-affected area, remember that wild animals, including rats, mice, snakes or spiders, may be trapped in your home, shed or garden.
      

        When returning to your home after a flood, take precautions to reduce the possibility of injury, illness or disease.
      

        Houses, sheds and other buildings or structures burnt in a bushfire can leave potential health hazards.
      

        Being prepared for a bushfire helps you cope better in an emergency.
      

        Debris, smoke, ash and dead animals from a bushfire can contaminate water tanks.
      

        Moderately cold weather increases the risk of illness and death. Check on your older neighbours, friends and relatives during cold weather, especially those living alone or with a health condition.
      

        You and your family should work out an emergency plan in case of flood.
      

        In an emergency, it is recommended that all infants and their carers evacuate early or immediately when advised by emergency services.
      

        Extreme heat can affect anyone, including the young and healthy.
      

        Heat kills more Australians than any natural disaster. Find out how you can treat and prevent heat-related illness, including heatstroke, heat exhaustion, heat cramp and heat rash. 
      

        Know the effects of extreme heat, who is at risk and how you can prepare yourself and others.
      

        The way to control indoor mould growth is to control the source of moisture.
      

        Sewage contains harmful microorganisms such as bacteria, viruses and protozoa.
      

        Talking to children openly in a way that suits their age, while also involving them in decisions regarding bushfire preparation and response, will help them feel emotionally secure and confident. 
      

        Urban flash flooding can happen quickly and without warning. Keep up-to-date with the latest warnings through the VicEmergency website or download the app. 
      

        Not all air conditioners are safe to use when it is smoky outside, such as during a bushfire.
      

        Mine tailings near goldmines may contain high levels of arsenic.
      

        Low-level exposure to cadmium over a long period of time may cause health effects because cadmium can accumulate in the body.
      

        Sprayed chemicals can drift over neighbouring properties or water sources, and can affect human health, animals or the environment.
      

        CCA treated timber should not be used to build children's play equipment, patios, new garden furniture, decking or handrails.
      

        To reduce risks on the farm, use hazardous chemicals according to manufacturer guidelines or replace them with less dangerous options.
      

        It can be dangerous to dispose of hazardous wastes through regular rubbish collections.
      

        Long-term exposure to low levels of lead may produce symptoms including irritability, lack of energy and loss of appetite.
      

        If you shoot firearms, handle bullets, make your own ammunition or visit shooting ranges, you’re at a higher risk for lead exposure. 
      

        Preventing or minimising exposure to mercury in your environment is the best way to reduce the risk of mercury poisoning.
      

        Pregnant women and young children should limit consumption of fish that contain high levels of mercury.
      

        If you use pesticides to control pests around the house, make sure you use as little as possible.
      

        If you have pest problems that you cannot manage yourself, you may need to hire an authorised pest control operator.
      

        Water quality of natural water sources, such as beaches and rivers, can vary greatly. Keeping a lookout for poor water quality (such as water that is discoloured, murky or smells unpleasant) will help you decide when it is safe to enter the water. By paying attention to a few noticeable signs, you can keep yourself safe.
      

        The effects of climate change will have a serious impact on the physical and mental health of people around the world.
      

        Some types of algae and cyanobacteria (also known as blue-green algae) produce toxins that can harm people and animals when swallowed, inhaled or touched. Do not enter the water at locations affected 
      

        Urban flash flooding can happen quickly and without warning. Keep up-to-date with the latest warnings through the VicEmergency website or download the app. 
      

        When returning to a flood-affected area, remember that wild animals, including rats, mice, snakes or spiders, may be trapped in your home, shed or garden.
      

        When returning to your home after a flood, take precautions to reduce the possibility of injury, illness or disease.
      

        The major sources of man-made air pollution in Melbourne are from motor vehicle emissions and wood heaters. 
      

        Allergy occurs when the body overreacts to a 'trigger' that is harmless to most people.
      

        Moderately cold weather increases the risk of illness and death. Check on your older neighbours, friends and relatives during cold weather, especially those living alone or with a health condition.
      

        Disease clusters are rare but can cause community concern about the possible effects of exposure to environmental hazards.
      

        You and your family should work out an emergency plan in case of flood.
      

        High-risk food should be kept at 5 °C or below, and above 60 °C to avoid the temperature danger zone and food poisoning.
      

        Some types of algae and cyanobacteria (also known as blue-green algae) produce toxins that can harm people and animals when swallowed, inhaled or touched. Do not enter the water at locations affected 
      

        It can be dangerous to dispose of hazardous wastes through regular rubbish collections.
      

        Learn how to prepare and cook food safely at home.
      

        Learn how to store food safely in your fridge at home.
      

        People who fish in the Lower Yarra and Maribyrnong rivers need to be careful about eating their catch because of the risk of chemical exposure.
      

        Food allergy is an immune response, while food intolerance is a chemical reaction.
      

        You can minimise the risk of food poisoning by taking simple precautions.
      

        High-risk food should be kept at 5 °C or below, and above 60 °C to avoid the temperature danger zone and food poisoning.
      

        Some types of algae and cyanobacteria (also known as blue-green algae) produce toxins that can harm people and animals when swallowed, inhaled or touched. Do not enter the water at locations affected 
      

        Keeping chickens as pets can be a rewarding experience, especially for children. However, chickens and other poultry can carry germs such as Salmonella, even when they appear healthy and clean.
      

        Chemicals such as pesticides, antibiotics and hormones are used to boost food production and ensure adequate food supply.
      

        When asbestos fibres become airborne, people working with asbestos may inhale particles which remain in their lungs.
      

        Asbestos fibres breathed into the lungs can cause a range of health problems including lung cancer and mesothelioma.
      

        Bedbugs have highly developed mouth parts that can pierce skin.
      

        Gardening is an enjoyable form of exercise, but you need to take care.
      

        If you service your gas heater regularly and use it correctly, it will be safe and economical to use.
      

        When handled properly, greywater can be safely reused for the garden.
      

        It can be dangerous to dispose of hazardous wastes through regular rubbish collections.
      

        Use this simple checklist and take action to prevent mosquitoes from entering your home. The best protection from mosquito-borne diseases is to avoid mosquito bites. 
      

        The way to control indoor mould growth is to control the source of moisture.
      

        Passive smoking means breathing other people's second-hand tobacco smoke. Passive smoking increases the risk of serious illness in both children and adults.
      

        If you use pesticides to control pests around the house, make sure you use as little as possible.
      

        If you have pest problems that you cannot manage yourself, you may need to hire an authorised pest control operator.
      

        Sewage contains harmful microorganisms such as bacteria, viruses and protozoa.
      

        Not all air conditioners are safe to use when it is smoky outside, such as during a bushfire.
      

        The smoke from wood fires can affect air quality and may affect people's health.
      

        Since the ulcer gets bigger with time, early diagnosis and prompt treatment of Buruli ulcer can keep skin loss to a minimum.
      

        Disease clusters are rare but can cause community concern about the possible effects of exposure to environmental hazards.
      

        Some types of algae and cyanobacteria (also known as blue-green algae) produce toxins that can harm people and animals when swallowed, inhaled or touched. Do not enter the water at locations affected 
      

        We can keep our pools safe, healthy, and most importantly fun.
      

        Some mosquitoes can carry diseases that are transmitted through mosquito bites. It is often necessary for landowners and land occupiers to manage mosquito numbers through an integrated mosquito manage
      

        Use this simple checklist and take action to prevent mosquitoes from spoiling your holiday. Mosquitoes can carry diseases be prepared and avoid mosquito bites. 
      

        Use this simple checklist and take action to prevent mosquitoes from entering your home. The best protection from mosquito-borne diseases is to avoid mosquito bites. 
      

        You can reduce the risk of mosquito bites if you get rid of potential mosquito breeding sites around your home.
      

        A needlestick injury means the skin is accidentally punctured by a used needle. Diseases that could be transmitted by a needle or needlestick injury include human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B and hepatitis C.
      

        When asbestos fibres become airborne, people working with asbestos may inhale particles which remain in their lungs.
      

        Long-term exposure to asbestos is a cause of lung cancer and other serious illnesses.
      

        The effect of electromagetic fields (EMF) from power lines and other sources is a controversial issue.
      

        Legionnaires' disease is a form of pneumonia.
      

        Using a mobile phone while driving greatly increases the risk of traffic accidents.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        The simplest form of prevention for lyssavirus is to avoid close contact with bats.
      

        Find out how important you and your child's immunisation is to the most vulnerable members in our community.
      

        Immunisation against chickenpox can protect your child from getting chickenpox and from the possible serious complications of chickenpox.
      

        How to book your COVID-19 booster appointment and advice about vaccination.
      

        Diphtheria is a serious bacterial disease that causes severe inflammation of the nose, throat and windpipe.
      

        Access to vaccines has changed lives and protects our children from crippling diseases such as polio. 
      

        Can a child's immune system be overloaded by immunisations? The answer is no. Talk to a qualified medical expert like your doctor to find out more about immunisation.
      

        Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) is a bacterium that causes a life-threatening infection that can lead to serious illness, especially in children.
      

        Immunisation is the best protection against hepatitis A infection and it is recommended for people in high-risk groups.
      

        Immunisation against hepatitis B reduces the risk of infection in babies.
      

        Information about human papillomavirus (HPV)  including symptoms, causes, prevention, sexual transmission, cervical screening and immunisation to protect against cervical and HPV-related cancers.
      

        A number of combined immunisations against diphtheria, tetanus and other infectious diseases are available to provide protection at various life stages.
      

        By law, parents or guardians must provide an Immunisation History Statement when enrolling children in any childcare service, kindergarten or  primary school in Victoria.
      

        Influenza (flu) immunisation is recommended for people in known high risk groups.
      

        Leptospirosis is a disease spread from animals to humans, caused by infection with the bacteria Leptospira. 
      

        Measles can cause serious and sometimes fatal complications, including pneumonia and brain inflammation.
      

        Immunisation is the best protection against measles, mumps, rubella and varicella (chickenpox).
      

        Melissa shares her story of how her baby caught chickenpox at 5 weeks old.
      

        Meningococcal group vaccines provide good protection against meningococcal group diseases.
      

        Mumps is a viral illness that causes fever and swollen salivary glands, and a swollen face.
      

        Immunisation can substantially reduce the risk of pneumococcal disease, especially in young children.
      

        You need several doses of the vaccine before you are fully protected against polio.
      

        This pre-immunisation checklist will help you prepare so you know what to expect and what information you will need to give your GP or clinic staff before your immunisation.
      

        Rabies is a highly fatal disease that affects the central nervous system.
      

        Talk to a qualified medical expert like your doctor to find out more about immunisation.
      

        Rotavirus is a common cause of viral gastroenteritis for Australian babies and preschool children.
      

        Children need several doses of the vaccine to reduce the risk of rotavirus.
      

        Some immunisations are recommended for all Australian teenagers.
      

        Smallpox was once a feared and highly contagious viral disease.
      

        Tetanus is a life-threatening disease and immunisation is the best way to reduce your risk.
      

        If you are travelling or passing through areas infected with yellow fever, some countries require you to be vaccinated.
      

        Tuberculosis (TB) is spread when a person with an active infection coughs, laughs, sings or sneezes.
      

        Signs, symptoms and prevention of typhoid and paratyphoid
      

        A family shares their experience when their baby daughter contracted whooping cough (or pertussis)
      

        The major symptom of whooping cough is a severe cough, which is often followed by a 'whooping' sound.
      

        Immunisation saves lives. It protects you, your family and your community. And it also helps protect future generations by eradicating diseases.
      

        Find out how important you and your child's immunisation is to the most vulnerable members in our community.
      

        Can a child's immune system be overloaded by immunisations? The answer is no. Talk to a qualified medical expert like your doctor to find out more about immunisation.
      

        We answer some common questions about immunisation, including how immunisation works, why it's important and where you can be immunised.
      

        Find out more about possible side effects of immunisation.
      

        Immunisations are important for you as you get older, because your immune system can become less effective at protecting you from some diseases. 
      

        This pre-immunisation checklist will help you prepare so you know what to expect and what information you will need to give your GP or clinic staff before your immunisation.
      

        Talk to a qualified medical expert like your doctor to find out more about immunisation.
      

        A family shares their experience when their baby daughter contracted whooping cough (or pertussis)
      

        Immunisation saves lives. It protects you, your family and your community. And it also helps protect future generations by eradicating diseases.
      

        Access to vaccines has changed lives and protects our children from crippling diseases such as polio. 
      

        The immune system remembers every germ it has ever overcome.
      

        We answer some common questions about immunisation, including how immunisation works, why it's important and where you can be immunised.
      

        The immunisation program in Victoria may be different than other countries, and individuals who have moved to Victoria from overseas may need catch-up immunisations.  
      

        Many bacterial infections can be treated with antibiotics, but they are useless against viral infections.
      

        This pre-immunisation checklist will help you prepare so you know what to expect and what information you will need to give your GP or clinic staff before your immunisation.
      

        Talk to a qualified medical expert like your doctor to find out more about immunisation.
      

        Vaccines stimulate the body to produce antibodies to provide immunity against one or several diseases.
      

        Immunisation saves lives. It protects you, your family and your community. And it also helps protect future generations by eradicating diseases.
      

        Being immunised from an early age helps protect your child against serious childhood infections.
      

        Immunisations are recorded on the centralised Australian Immunisation Register (AIR). Individuals can download their Immunisation History Statement from the AIR.
      

        We answer some common questions about immunisation, including how immunisation works, why it's important and where you can be immunised.
      

        A number of combined immunisations against diphtheria, tetanus and other infectious diseases are available to provide protection at various life stages.
      

        Immunisation can protect a woman and her unborn baby against many infectious diseases.
      

        By law, parents or guardians must provide an Immunisation History Statement when enrolling children in any childcare service, kindergarten or  primary school in Victoria.
      

        Everyone's immunisation needs are different and are influenced by your health, lifestyle, age and occupation.
      

        If you've recently arrived in Australia or missed out on an immunisation for any reason, you may need catch-up doses.
      

        Immunisations are important for you as you get older, because your immune system can become less effective at protecting you from some diseases. 
      

        Some jobs have a higher risk of exposure to infectious diseases, so if your job is one of these, it’s a good idea to check your immunisation status. 
      

        Influenza (flu) immunisation is recommended for people in known high risk groups.
      

        Melissa shares her story of how her baby caught chickenpox at 5 weeks old.
      

        This pre-immunisation checklist will help you prepare so you know what to expect and what information you will need to give your GP or clinic staff before your immunisation.
      

        Provides an overview of family support programs and health services available to refugees and asylum seekers living in Victoria.
      

        Some immunisations are recommended for all Australian teenagers.
      

        Immunisation saves lives. It protects you, your family and your community. And it also helps protect future generations by eradicating diseases.
      

        We answer some common questions about immunisation, including how immunisation works, why it's important and where you can be immunised.
      

        Find out more about possible side effects of immunisation.
      

        Immunisation can protect a woman and her unborn baby against many infectious diseases.
      

        By law, parents or guardians must provide an Immunisation History Statement when enrolling children in any childcare service, kindergarten or  primary school in Victoria.
      

        Everyone's immunisation needs are different and are influenced by your health, lifestyle, age and occupation.
      

        Find out how important you and your child's immunisation is to the most vulnerable members in our community.
      

        The immunisation program in Victoria may be different than other countries, and individuals who have moved to Victoria from overseas may need catch-up immunisations.  
      

        Immunisations are important for you as you get older, because your immune system can become less effective at protecting you from some diseases. 
      

        Some jobs have a higher risk of exposure to infectious diseases, so if your job is one of these, it’s a good idea to check your immunisation status. 
      

        Melissa shares her story of how her baby caught chickenpox at 5 weeks old.
      

        This pre-immunisation checklist will help you prepare so you know what to expect and what information you will need to give your GP or clinic staff before your immunisation.
      

        A family shares their experience when their baby daughter contracted whooping cough (or pertussis)
      

        How to book your COVID-19 booster appointment and advice about vaccination.
      

        Being immunised from an early age helps protect your child against serious childhood infections.
      

        Immunisations are recorded on the centralised Australian Immunisation Register (AIR). Individuals can download their Immunisation History Statement from the AIR.
      

        We answer some common questions about immunisation, including how immunisation works, why it's important and where you can be immunised.
      

        By law, parents or guardians must provide an Immunisation History Statement when enrolling children in any childcare service, kindergarten or  primary school in Victoria.
      

        If you've recently arrived in Australia or missed out on an immunisation for any reason, you may need catch-up doses.
      

        Immunisations are important for you as you get older, because your immune system can become less effective at protecting you from some diseases. 
      

        This pre-immunisation checklist will help you prepare so you know what to expect and what information you will need to give your GP or clinic staff before your immunisation.
      

        Provides an overview of family support programs and health services available to refugees and asylum seekers living in Victoria.
      

        Some immunisations are recommended for all Australian teenagers.
      

        Immunisations in Victoria are provided by local councils, GPs, nurses in medical clinics and community health services, maternal and child health nurses, travel clinics, pharmacists and hospitals.
      

        Diphtheria is a serious bacterial disease that causes severe inflammation of the nose, throat and windpipe.
      

        Immunisation is the best protection against hepatitis A infection and it is recommended for people in high-risk groups.
      

        Immunisation against hepatitis B reduces the risk of infection in babies.
      

        Information about human papillomavirus (HPV)  including symptoms, causes, prevention, sexual transmission, cervical screening and immunisation to protect against cervical and HPV-related cancers.
      

        Everyone's immunisation needs are different and are influenced by your health, lifestyle, age and occupation.
      

        A number of combined immunisations against diphtheria, tetanus and other infectious diseases are available to provide protection at various life stages.
      

        If you've recently arrived in Australia or missed out on an immunisation for any reason, you may need catch-up doses.
      

        Many bacterial infections can be treated with antibiotics, but they are useless against viral infections.
      

        Influenza (flu) immunisation is recommended for people in known high risk groups.
      

        Measles can cause serious and sometimes fatal complications, including pneumonia and brain inflammation.
      

        Immunisation is the best protection against measles, mumps, rubella and varicella (chickenpox).
      

        Meningitis can cause death and requires urgent medical attention.
      

        Meningococcal group vaccines provide good protection against meningococcal group diseases.
      

        Immunisation can substantially reduce the risk of pneumococcal disease, especially in young children.
      

        You need several doses of the vaccine before you are fully protected against polio.
      

        Travelling to developing nations is not encouraged during pregnancy, due to the risk of disease and the standard of medical facilities.
      

        Children need several doses of the vaccine to reduce the risk of rotavirus.
      

        Rubella is a mild illness for most people, but very dangerous for pregnant women and their babies.
      

        Tetanus is a life-threatening disease and immunisation is the best way to reduce your risk.
      

        If you are travelling or passing through areas infected with yellow fever, some countries require you to be vaccinated.
      

        If you are travelling overseas, check with your doctor well in advance to find out what immunisations you need.
      

        Tuberculosis (TB) is spread when a person with an active infection coughs, laughs, sings or sneezes.
      

        Signs, symptoms and prevention of typhoid and paratyphoid
      

        Vaccines stimulate the body to produce antibodies to provide immunity against one or several diseases.
      

        Immunisations in Victoria are provided by local councils, GPs, nurses in medical clinics and community health services, maternal and child health nurses, travel clinics, pharmacists and hospitals.
      

        The major symptom of whooping cough is a severe cough, which is often followed by a 'whooping' sound.
      

        Everyone's immunisation needs are different and are influenced by your health, lifestyle, age and occupation.
      

        Some jobs have a higher risk of exposure to infectious diseases, so if your job is one of these, it’s a good idea to check your immunisation status. 
      

        Influenza (flu) immunisation is recommended for people in known high risk groups.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        Dummy sucking should stop before school age to avoid teeth or mouth problems.
      

        A child needs a daytime nap until they are around 2 and a half to 3 years of age.
      

        Your child may have only a few scary dreams a year, or be troubled by nightmares much more often.
      

        Sleep research suggests that teenagers need between eight and 10 hours of sleep every night.
      

        Activity and nutrition help fight fatigue and put more energy into your daily life.
      

        Getting enough sleep is vital. Long term sleep deficiency can affect your mood. You can improve your sleep quality.
      

        You can retrain your body and mind so that you sleep well and wake feeling rested.
      

        Fatigue is a feeling of constant tiredness or lack of energy. Causes include illness, health conditions, psychological and lifestyle factors. Find out more about symptoms, diagnosis and treatment.
      

        Getting enough sleep is vital. Long term sleep deficiency can affect your mood. You can improve your sleep quality.
      

        A person working the night shift is at greater risk of various disorders and accidents.
      

        A fatigued person is accident prone and more likely to make mistakes and bad decisions.
      

        Fatigue is thought to cause about one in six road accidents - make sure you get enough sleep.
      

        Hypersomnia means excessive sleepiness - it can have a number of different causes.
      

        If you suffer badly from jet lag, it may be worthwhile considering a westerly travel route if possible.
      

        Restless legs syndrome has been described as a type of cramp, soreness or a creeping, crawling feeling.
      

        Sleep disorders can prevent some people from getting enough sleep.
      

        Around one in three people regularly have trouble falling asleep or staying asleep.
      

        A person with narcolepsy is extremely sleepy all the time and may fall asleep several times a day.
      

        A person with sleep apnoea may wake hundreds of times every night.
      

        Snoring isn't harmful but may lead to long-term sleep deprivation.
      

        Teeth grinding (bruxism) is involuntary clenching or grinding of the teeth, usually during sleep.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        Sibling rivalry is a common problem, particularly among children who are the same sex and close together in age.
      

        How parents and carers can talk to children about relationships, sex and sexuality. Includes - how and when to start, topics at different ages and stages, teenage sex, school safety and support. 
      

        It is helpful to imagine assertiveness as the middle ground between aggression and passivity.
      

        Peer groups can be a very positive influence on your teenager's life.
      

        Intimacy in a relationship means being able to share a whole range of thoughts, feelings and experiences that we have as human beings.
      

        A good relationship doesn't just happen - you have to work at it.
      

        Good communication is about the way we talk and listen, and about our body language.
      

        Having friends and other social connections is good for your health and wellbeing.
      

        Sibling rivalry is a common problem, particularly among children who are the same sex and close together in age.
      

        It is normal to disagree with each other from time to time and occasional conflict is part of family life.
      

        It might be valuable to occasionally evaluate the dynamics of your family to ensure that everyone is as happy as they could be.
      

        Managing a relationship breakdown is difficult. What you feel during a relationship breakdown may be very hard, but it will pass in time.
      

        The birth of your first child can significantly change your relationship with your partner and may impact on other relationships.
      

        Provides an overview of family support programs and health services available to refugees and asylum seekers living in Victoria.
      

        How parents and carers can talk to children about relationships, sex and sexuality. Includes - how and when to start, topics at different ages and stages, teenage sex, school safety and support. 
      

        There are many people you can talk to who can help you overcome feelings of wanting to lash out.
      

        Victoria has a range of services available to help people at risk of, experiencing or escaping from family violence.
      

        The sooner a person with a mental illness receives treatment, the better the outcome is likely to be.
      

        There is a range of non-government agencies available to help families under stress in caring for their children.
      

        Provides an overview of family support programs and health services available to refugees and asylum seekers living in Victoria.
      

        You may need outside help to resolve problems and ensure your relationship stays healthy and strong.
      

        When you, your partner or someone in your family has a mental illness, it can cause stress and worry for everyone.
      

        Having friends and other social connections is good for your health and wellbeing.
      

        Managing a relationship breakdown is difficult. What you feel during a relationship breakdown may be very hard, but it will pass in time.
      

        You may need outside help to resolve problems and ensure your relationship stays healthy and strong.
      

        With the physical and emotional closeness of a partnership, it is inevitable that there is sometimes conflict.
      

        A good relationship doesn't just happen - you have to work at it.
      

        Good communication is about the way we talk and listen, and about our body language.
      

        Having friends and other social connections is good for your health and wellbeing.
      

        The expense of gifts and food, the pressure of shopping, and the expectations of the season can make Christmas an extremely stressful time.
      

        Managing a relationship breakdown is difficult. What you feel during a relationship breakdown may be very hard, but it will pass in time.
      

        The birth of your first child can significantly change your relationship with your partner and may impact on other relationships.
      

        Intimacy in a relationship means being able to share a whole range of thoughts, feelings and experiences that we have as human beings.
      

        With the physical and emotional closeness of a partnership, it is inevitable that there is sometimes conflict.
      

        When you, your partner or someone in your family has a mental illness, it can cause stress and worry for everyone.
      

        Managing a relationship breakdown is difficult. What you feel during a relationship breakdown may be very hard, but it will pass in time.
      

        If you are thinking about re-partnering, there are questions you can ask yourself to check whether you are emotionally ready to do so.
      

        A family breakup may be even harder for children if they have to move house as a result.
      

        Separating parents can help children by giving them honest explanations and emotional support.
      

        Managing a relationship breakdown is difficult. What you feel during a relationship breakdown may be very hard, but it will pass in time.
      

        Well-managed anger can be a useful emotion that motivates you to make positive changes.
      

        Children exposed to domestic violence are more likely to experience emotional and behavioural problems.
      

        Perpetrators often make excuses for their violence, for example, blaming alcohol or stress.
      

        You can successfully combine breastfeeding with work if you have support from your employer, colleagues and family.
      

        Work-related stress causes an increase in sick days and absenteeism, a higher turnover of staff and a drop in productivity.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        Advance care plan personal stories
      

        Some people prefer having palliative care at home because of the familiar environment, feeling of independence and close access to family, friends and the local community.
      

        Some people prefer having palliative care at home because of the familiar environment, feeling of independence and close access to family, friends and the local community.
      

        Palliative care for children provides physical, emotional, social and spiritual support to newborns, infants, children and young people with a life-limiting condition and their families.  
      

        If you are terminally ill, there is financial support available for your care, health expenses and other everyday expenses.
      

        You can appoint someone to be your medical power of attorney, also known as ‘enduring power of attorney (medical treatment)’, to make medical decisions on your behalf when, in certain circumstances, you can’t.
      

        Palliative care - personal stories
      

        If you have preferences about how and where you want to die, it is important that you tell your carers, family, friends and healthcare professionals
      

        You have the right to ask a doctor for a second opinion if you are unsure about your doctor's suggested medical treatment or a diagnosis.
      

        When someone dies, it will help you to have a written plan of what you need to do including who you need to contact.
      

        It is important for the family members of someone who is facing the end of their life to respect their wishes and follow through with the requests of their loved one as much as is practical and possible
      

        Palliative care for children provides physical, emotional, social and spiritual support to newborns, infants, children and young people with a life-limiting condition and their families.  
      

        People who have support from family and friends are less likely to suffer poor health after bereavement and loss.
      

        It can be difficult to talk to a child about death, but it is important to be honest with them.
      

        It is important that you make as much quality time as possible to spend with those you love and that you talk to them about dying.
      

        When someone dies, it will help you to have a written plan of what you need to do including who you need to contact.
      

        Some people prefer having palliative care at home because of the familiar environment, feeling of independence and close access to family, friends and the local community.
      

        Palliative care for children provides physical, emotional, social and spiritual support to newborns, infants, children and young people with a life-limiting condition and their families.  
      

        End of life and palliative care is based on person-centred and holistic care. Talk with your family, close friends, doctor and your palliative care team about what they can do to help you to make the most of each day.
      

        Some people prefer having palliative care at home because of the familiar environment, feeling of independence and close access to family, friends and the local community.
      

        Some people prefer having palliative care at home because of the familiar environment, feeling of independence and close access to family, friends and the local community.
      

        It is important for the family members of someone who is facing the end of their life to respect their wishes and follow through with the requests of their loved one as much as is practical and possible
      

        Palliative care for children provides physical, emotional, social and spiritual support to newborns, infants, children and young people with a life-limiting condition and their families.  
      

        If you are living with a life-limiting illness, end of life and palliative care services can be provided to you at home. 
      

        End of life and palliative care for Victorians living with a disability can be provided at home, in specialist disability accommodation, in residential aged care or in an inpatient facility at a hospital.
      

        There are culturally sensitive palliative care services that will help you and your family.
      

        There are end of life and palliative care services that provide safe, inclusive care for people who identify as LGBTIQA+.
      

        There are culturally sensitive palliative care services that will help you and your family.
      

        Advance care plan personal stories
      

        Some people prefer having palliative care at home because of the familiar environment, feeling of independence and close access to family, friends and the local community.
      

        Carers Victoria provides information and advice to carers and  their families about carer supports and services.
      

        Some people prefer having palliative care at home because of the familiar environment, feeling of independence and close access to family, friends and the local community.
      

        Palliative care for children provides physical, emotional, social and spiritual support to newborns, infants, children and young people with a life-limiting condition and their families.  
      

        Some people prefer having palliative care at home because of the familiar environment, feeling of independence and close access to family, friends and the local community.
      

        End of life and palliative care is based on person-centred and holistic care. Talk with your family, close friends, doctor and your palliative care team about what they can do to help you to make the most of each day.
      

        Palliative care - personal stories
      

        It is okay to speak up and make a complaint if you think something is wrong with the service being provided.
      

        Palliative care information and advice is available from Palliative Care Victoria
      

        Some people prefer having palliative care at home because of the familiar environment, feeling of independence and close access to family, friends and the local community.
      

        Some people prefer having palliative care at home because of the familiar environment, feeling of independence and close access to family, friends and the local community.
      

        It is important for the family members of someone who is facing the end of their life to respect their wishes and follow through with the requests of their loved one as much as is practical and possible
      

        Find out how you can access palliative care for medical treatment, emotional support and practical help to maintain your quality of life for as long as your condition allows. 
      

        Some people prefer having palliative care at home because of the familiar environment, feeling of independence and close access to family, friends and the local community.
      

        Some people prefer having palliative care at home because of the familiar environment, feeling of independence and close access to family, friends and the local community.
      

        Palliative care helps improve the quality of life for a person with a life-limiting illness, as well as the lives of their family, friends and carers, through advice, information, referral and support.  
      

        Palliative care for children provides physical, emotional, social and spiritual support to newborns, infants, children and young people with a life-limiting condition and their families.  
      

        End of life and palliative care is based on person-centred and holistic care. Talk with your family, close friends, doctor and your palliative care team about what they can do to help you to make the most of each day.
      

        You can have inpatient palliative care in a hospital or a specialist inpatient palliative care unit. 
      

        Victoria is the first state in Australia to pass voluntary assisted dying laws. The Voluntary Assisted Dying Act (2017) provides a safe legal framework for people who are suffering and dying to choose the manner and timing of their death. 
      

        When someone dies, it will help you to have a written plan of what you need to do including who you need to contact.
      

        The members of your palliative care team may include doctors, nurses, allied health professionals, volunteers and carers.
      

        It is important for the family members of someone who is facing the end of their life to respect their wishes and follow through with the requests of their loved one as much as is practical and possible
      

        Advance care plan personal stories
      

        Advance care plans can help the people close to you and those caring for you to know what is important to you about the level of healthcare and quality of life you would want.
      

        It is important to acknowledge that you will respond in your own way to the news that you are dying. Respect your need to question, your need for silence and your need to talk.
      

        Some people prefer having palliative care at home because of the familiar environment, feeling of independence and close access to family, friends and the local community.
      

        Palliative care for children provides physical, emotional, social and spiritual support to newborns, infants, children and young people with a life-limiting condition and their families.  
      

        End of life and palliative care is based on person-centred and holistic care. Talk with your family, close friends, doctor and your palliative care team about what they can do to help you to make the most of each day.
      

        Planning and making decisions about the end of your life can be a positive experience. It is a good opportunity to reflect on the things that are important to you, and to make arrangements that suit you.
      

        For some people with a life-limiting illness, work can play a positive role in providing a continued sense of identity, independence and ongoing financial security for their family.  
      

        The healthcare professionals in your palliative care team will work together to manage your pain so that you can focus on the things you enjoy. 
      

        Palliative care - personal stories
      

        Victoria is the first state in Australia to pass voluntary assisted dying laws. The Voluntary Assisted Dying Act (2017) provides a safe legal framework for people who are suffering and dying to choose the manner and timing of their death. 
      

        When someone dies, it will help you to have a written plan of what you need to do including who you need to contact.
      

        It is important for the family members of someone who is facing the end of their life to respect their wishes and follow through with the requests of their loved one as much as is practical and possible
      

        Grief Australia provides specialist bereavement services for individuals and families who need help after the death of someone close to them. 
      

        Beyond Blue is an organisation that provides a free online and telephone helpline for people with depression, anxiety or other mental health issues.
      

        Cancer Council Victoria aims to reduce the impact of all  cancers for all Victorians.
      

        Carer Advisory Service provides information and advice to  carers.
      

        The CDAMS provides diagnosis and referrals to those   experiencing memory loss and decreased cognition.
      

        Community health centres operate across   Victoria and offer a range of community health   services to local residents.
      

        DBMAS works to improve the lives of people with dementia  whose behaviour is affecting their care.
      

        EACH Social and Community Health is a health service that  aims to improve community health and wellbeing.
      

        Some people prefer having palliative care at home because of the familiar environment, feeling of independence and close access to family, friends and the local community.
      

        Palliative care for children provides physical, emotional, social and spiritual support to newborns, infants, children and young people with a life-limiting condition and their families.  
      

        Griefline provides counselling and support to Australians experiencing loss and grief.
      

        A haematologist specialises in diagnosing, treating and managing diseases of the blood and blood-producing organs. 
      

        Call Lifeline to anonymously and confidentially discuss any personal difficulties, including suicidal thoughts at any time. Calls can be made at any time.
      

        End of life and palliative care is based on person-centred and holistic care. Talk with your family, close friends, doctor and your palliative care team about what they can do to help you to make the most of each day.
      

        Massage therapy is the manipulation of a person’s soft tissue (such as muscles,  tendons, ligaments, skin, joints, lymphatic vessels or organs) for therapeutic purposes.
      

        My Aged Care aims to help you navigate the aged care system.
      

        The National Dementia Helpline is a telephone information and support service for people with dementia, their carers, families and friends. 
      

        An oncologist treats people with cancer.
      

        An orthopaedic surgeon specialises in diagnosing, treating, preventing and rehabilitating musculoskeletal injuries and diseases, both surgically and non-surgically.
      

        The Palliative Care Advice Service is a phone-based service for anyone seeking access to specialist guidance and advice for those living with a life-limiting illness and those who support them.
      

        A pharmacist is a professional who specialises in preparing and dispensing medications, including medicines, ointments and tablets. 
      

        A radiologist is a medical professional who specialises in using medical imaging technologies to diagnose and treat injury and disease. 
      

        A respiratory physician (respiratory and sleep medicine specialist) specialises in diagnosing, treating and preventing conditions and diseases affecting the respiratory  system. 
      

        Advance care plan personal stories
      

        Immediate family have the right to refuse a hospital post mortem of the deceased and can object to a coronial post mortem.
      

        Palliative care for children provides physical, emotional, social and spiritual support to newborns, infants, children and young people with a life-limiting condition and their families.  
      

        It is the funeral directors job to help with many of the legal responsibilities, including the death certificate.
      

        Grief is a process, not an event – most people will continue to grieve in subtle ways for the rest of their lives.
      

        If you're unsure of how to support someone who is grieving, ask them.
      

        Palliative care - personal stories
      

        It is important for the family members of someone who is facing the end of their life to respect their wishes and follow through with the requests of their loved one as much as is practical and possible
      

        Advance care plan personal stories
      

        Carers Victoria provides information and advice to carers and  their families about carer supports and services.
      

        Palliative care for children provides physical, emotional, social and spiritual support to newborns, infants, children and young people with a life-limiting condition and their families.  
      

        If you are living with a life-limiting illness, end of life and palliative care services can be provided to you at home. 
      

        End of life and palliative care for Victorians living with a disability can be provided at home, in specialist disability accommodation, in residential aged care or in an inpatient facility at a hospital.
      

        Some people prefer having palliative care at home because of the familiar environment, feeling of independence and close access to family, friends and the local community.
      

        If you're unsure of how to support someone who is grieving, ask them.
      

        If you are a carer, for example of a person with a disability or mental illness, or recovering from an accident or illness or an older person with care needs, you need to look after yourself or the demands may wear you down.
      

        Palliative care - personal stories
      

        It is okay to speak up and make a complaint if you think something is wrong with the service being provided.
      

        There are culturally sensitive palliative care services that will help you and your family.
      

        Some people prefer having palliative care at home because of the familiar environment, feeling of independence and close access to family, friends and the local community.
      

        It is important for the family members of someone who is facing the end of their life to respect their wishes and follow through with the requests of their loved one as much as is practical and possible
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        The symptoms of Huntington's disease usually, but not always, first appear when the person is approaching middle age.
      

        Weight loss is often associated with Huntington's disease, but it doesn?t appear to be a direct result of diet.
      

        Motor neurone disease (MND) is also called amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and Lou Gehrig's disease. MND is a rapidly progressing, neurological disease. Motor neurones are nerve cells that control the voluntary muscles of the trunk and limbs, and affect speech, swallowing and breathing. Damage to these nerves causes muscle weakness and wasting. People with MND become increasingly disabled, and may lose speech, have difficulty swallowing and eventually die from respiratory (breathing) failure.
      

        People with motor neurone disease can keep some independence and quality of life with the right help.
      

        A person with motor neurone disease may have difficulty with everyday items in their home.
      

        Problems using the toilet and bathroom can be stressful for both the person with motor neurone disease and their carer.
      

        Recreation and leisure are very important for everyone, especially for people with limited activity.
      

        Multiple sclerosis is not contagious, but it is progressive and unpredictable.
      

        Common symptoms of multiple sclerosis can be eased with medications, therapies and self-help strategies.
      

        Folic acid taken before conception, and during at least the first 4 weeks of pregnancy, can prevent around 7 out of 10 cases of neural tube defects.
      

        The combination of the nervous system and muscles is known as the neuromuscular system.
      

        Cerebral palsy affects people in different ways some people experience minor motor skill problems, while others may be totally physically dependent
      

        Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease is the most common inherited disorder affecting the peripheral nervous system.
      

        Essential tremor causes involuntary shaking or trembling of particular parts of the body, usually the head and hands, but it is not Parkinson's disease.
      

        To the casual observer, a person with Friedreich's ataxia may seem to be drunk.
      

        If you have a child with a disability you can help improve their communication and movement by encouraging them to take part in daily activities.
      

        Kennedy's disease is a rare inherited neuromuscular disorder that causes progressive weakening and wasting of the muscles, particularly the arms and legs.
      

        People affected by muscular dystrophy have different degrees of independence, mobility and carer needs.
      

        Myasthenia gravis is an autoimmune disease that causes muscle weakness.
      

        Polio is a serious disease that can cause life-threatening paralysis and possibly death.
      

        Restless legs syndrome has been described as a type of cramp, soreness or a creeping, crawling feeling.
      

        People with Rett syndrome have a keen desire to communicate.
      

        Milder forms of Tourette syndrome can be misdiagnosed, as it often occurs at the same time as attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and other disorders.
      

        People with Parkinson's disease can help manage their symptoms through medication and support.
      

        Constipation is a common complication of Parkinson's disease.
      

        Communication is the best remedy for all types of relationship problems, including sexual problems caused by Parkinson?s disease.
      

        Folate can prevent up to 70 per cent of spina bifida cases if taken daily for one month before conception and during the first three months of pregnancy.
      

        A child with spinal muscular atrophy type 1 rarely lives beyond three years of age.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        The Victorian Child Protection Service provides child-centred, family-focused services to protect children and young people who are at risk of significant harm.
      

        Growing up is not easy and at each stage of development, from pre-primary right through to the teen years, there are challenges that will test a child’s emotional and mental health.
      

        Children’s Health and Wellbeing Locals provide health and wellbeing support for children aged zero to 11 and their families and carers.
      

        Too many children are physically, sexually and emotionally abused and when this happens, it is up to adults to speak up.
      

        Find advice for the circumstances under which you can complain, tips for making the complaint and to whom you can address your complaint.
      

        In times of family crisis it’s good to know there are emergency services only a phone call away.
      

        There are many government funded family support services available to help parents and young people deal with family issues.
      

        Perpetrators often make excuses for their violence, for example, blaming alcohol or stress.
      

        There are personal and relationship services available to you that offer counselling and relationship advice.
      

        Any person who believes, on reasonable grounds, that a child needs protection can notify Child Protection.
      

        Any act occurring within a relationship where there is an implication of trust, which results in harm to an older person.  Abuse may be physical, sexual, financial, psychological and/or neglect.
      

        Perpetrators often make excuses for their violence, for example, blaming alcohol or stress.
      

        People with a disability who experience violence, abuse or neglect can seek help from a range of services specifically designed to help them.
      

        There are personal and relationship services available to you that offer counselling and relationship advice.
      

        Too many children are physically, sexually and emotionally abused and when this happens, it is up to adults to speak up.
      

        Early childhood education and childcare options to choose from include preschool, education and care at a centre, family day care, occasional care, after-school care and private nannies.
      

        Certain children are at a higher risk of physical or emotional harm than others due to their living circumstances or home environment.
      

        There is a range of subsidised and free health services, including services for mental health and dental health, available for children in Victoria.
      

        Children’s Health and Wellbeing Locals provide health and wellbeing support for children aged zero to 11 and their families and carers.
      

        For children diagnosed with a disability, getting the support they need as early as possible will give them the best chance of minimising the long-term effects of the disability. 
      

        There are many government funded family support services available to help parents and young people deal with family issues.
      

        It is normal to disagree with each other from time to time and occasional conflict is part of family life.
      

        There are personal and relationship services available to you that offer counselling and relationship advice.
      

        Provides an overview of family support programs and health services available to refugees and asylum seekers living in Victoria.
      

        As a parent, you have an important role in helping your child recover from sexual abuse.
      

        Immunisations in Victoria are provided by local councils, GPs, nurses in medical clinics and community health services, maternal and child health nurses, travel clinics, pharmacists and hospitals.
      

        There are many subsidised and free medical, dental, mental, community health services available to support young people in Victoria.
      

        Children’s Health and Wellbeing Locals provide health and wellbeing support for children aged zero to 11 and their families and carers.
      

        Your local Maternal and Child Health (MCH) service will be a great source of support after your baby is born.
      

        Nurse-on-Call is a free, confidential telephone helpline that provides immediate, expert health advice from a registered nurse, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. 

      

        You may need outside help to resolve problems and ensure your relationship stays healthy and strong.
      

        Immunisations in Victoria are provided by local councils, GPs, nurses in medical clinics and community health services, maternal and child health nurses, travel clinics, pharmacists and hospitals.
      

        There are personal and relationship services available to you that offer counselling and relationship advice.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.
Yoga brings the body and mind together and is built on three main elements – movement, breathing and meditation. Yoga has many physical and mental health benefits including improved posture, flexibility, strength, balance and body awareness.
Always consult your doctor before embarking on any new fitness program, especially if you have a pre-existing medical condition or have not exercised in a long time.
Pilates and yoga are often thought to be one in the same, however Pilates traditionally focuses more on control of movement and muscular endurance as opposed to yoga which connects the body to the mind through flow of movement.
Yoga is an ancient Indian philosophy that dates back thousands of years. It was designed as a path to spiritual enlightenment, but in modern times, the physical aspects of yoga have found huge popularity as a gentle form of exercise and stress management. There are many different varieties of yoga, but each one essentially relies on structured poses (asanas) practiced with breath awareness.
Researchers have discovered that the regular practice of yoga may produce many health benefits, including increased cardiovascular fitness, improved muscular strength and normalisation of blood pressure. Yoga is a renowned antidote to stress and promotes improved sleeping patterns. Over time, those who practice yoga report lower levels of stress, and increased feelings of happiness and wellbeing. This is because concentrating on the postures and the breath acts as a form of meditation.
The classical techniques of yoga date back more than 5000 years. The practice of yoga encourages effort, intelligence, accuracy, thoroughness, commitment and dedication. The word yoga originates from the Sanskrit language and means ‘to join or yoke together’. It brings your body and mind together, and is built on three main elements – exercise, breathing and meditation.
The movements of yoga are designed to  challenge flexibility, balance, coordination and strength, increasing your body’s efficiency and overall health. Breathing techniques promote greater mind body connection, improving the  function of body and mind.
Focusing on controlled movement and breathing prepares the body and mind for meditation, with an approach to a quiet mind that allows silence and relief from everyday stress. When practiced regularly, yoga can become a powerful and sophisticated discipline for achieving physical, mental and emotional wellbeing.
There are many different varieties of yoga, each with a slightly different slant. The most popular are Hatha, Bikram, Iyengar, Yin and Vinyasa yoga.
Each yoga posture, or asana, is held for a period of time and linked with controlled breathing. Generally, a yoga session begins with gentle asanas and works up to more vigorous or challenging postures. A full yoga session should move every part of your body and should include pranayama (breath control practices), relaxation and meditation.
The different postures or asanas include:
The practice of yoga asanas develops strength and flexibility, while soothing your nerves and calming your mind. The asanas affect the muscles, joints and skin, and the whole body – glands, nerves, internal organs, bones, respiration and the brain. The physical building blocks of yoga are the posture and the breath.
Health benefits of yoga include:
Yoga is taught in classes, catering for beginners through to advanced participants. It is non-competitive and suitable for anyone, regardless of your age or fitness level. Your yoga teacher should carefully guide and observe you, and modify postures when necessary.
An asana should never cause pain. If you experience pain or discomfort, ease back on the stretch or don’t do it at all. It is important to keep within your physical limits.
If you are a male over 45 years of age or a female over 55 years of age, haven’t exercised for a long time or have a pre-existing medical condition, you should check with your preferred general practitioner or another suitably qualified professional before starting any new or regular exercise routine.
Pre-exercise  screeningExternal Link   is used to identify people with medical conditions or contraindications that may put them at a higher risk of experiencing an adverse event during physical activity. It is a tool to help decide if the potential benefits of exercise outweigh the risks for you and whether you should seek further guidance from an allied health or medical professional.
Yoga classes usually have 10 to 20 people, allowing for individual attention. Suggestions for getting the most out of your yoga class include:

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

Content on this website is provided for information purposes only. Information about a therapy, service, product or treatment does not in any way endorse or support such therapy, service, product or treatment and is not intended to replace advice from your doctor or other registered health professional. The information and materials contained on this website are not intended to constitute a comprehensive guide concerning all aspects of the therapy, product or treatment described on the website. All users are urged to always seek advice from a registered health care professional for diagnosis and answers to their medical questions and to ascertain whether the particular therapy, service, product or treatment described on the website is suitable in their circumstances. The State of Victoria and the Department of Health shall not bear any liability for reliance by any user on the materials contained on this website.

This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        Allergies to insect stings and bites range from milder allergic reactions to life-threatening, severe allergic reactions (anaphylaxis).
      

        All medication has the potential to cause allergies but some people can have allergic reactions to specific prescription or over-the-counter medications.
      

        Aspergillus is a fungus that commonly grows on rotting vegetation. It can cause asthma symptoms.
      

        Find out when thunderstorm asthma events take place, risks, symptoms and how to protect yourself and others. What people with hay fever and asthma should know.
      

        Areas around the home that are heavily used, such as beds and upholstered furniture, will have much higher mite populations than the rest of the house.
      

        Asthma triggers are substances, conditions or activities that lead to symptoms of asthma.
      

        The best way to manage latex allergy is to avoid exposure to latex products.
      

        The way to control indoor mould growth is to control the source of moisture.
      

        Pollen allergies cause seasonal hay fever and asthma and can be treated with antihistamines, nasal sprays or asthma medication
      

        Watch Mohamed's story and hear how his hay fever turned to asthma after a thunderstorm asthma event.
      

        Anaphylaxis is a severe allergic reaction that requires urgent medical attention.
      

        Eczema can vary in severity, and symptoms may flare up or subside from day to day.
      

        Hay fever is an allergic reaction to airborne allergens that can occur at any time of the year.
      

        Hives (urticaria) are a reaction to the release of histamine into the skin.
      

        Watch Mohamed's story and hear how his hay fever turned to asthma after a thunderstorm asthma event.
      

        Severe allergic reactions (anaphylaxis) and asthma attacks need urgent emergency first aid. In an emergency, always call triple zero (000).
      

        Allergy occurs when the body overreacts to a 'trigger' that is harmless to most people.
      

        Allergy testing is used to find which substances provoke an allergic reaction.
      

        Many people with asthma find their symptoms can worsen when they are exposed to certain allergens like house dust mite, animal dander, pollen and mould.
      

        The immune system remembers every germ it has ever overcome.
      

        Coeliac disease is an immune disease caused by gluten.
      

        Milk allergy symptoms range from mild to a life-threatening severe allergic reaction. Avoid food containing milk only under strict medical supervision.
      

        Egg allergy is one of the most common causes of allergies in children with symptoms ranging from mild to life-threatening reactions.
      

        The long-term effects of consuming a combination of different additives in our food are currently unknown.
      

        Food allergy is an immune response, while food intolerance is a chemical reaction.
      

        Food labels carry useful information to help you make good choices about food.
      

        Gluten sensitivity can be managed with a gluten-free diet.
      

        Symptoms of lactose intolerance include bloating, gas, abdominal pain and diarrhoea.
      

        Peanuts, tree nuts and seeds can all cause allergies with symptoms ranging from milder reactions to a severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis).
      

        Raw milk is milk that has not been pasteurised to kill bacteria that could be harmful to humans.
      

        Symptoms of fish and shellfish allergies vary and range from milder reactions to a life-threatening severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis).
      

        Severe allergic reactions (anaphylaxis) and asthma attacks need urgent emergency first aid. In an emergency, always call triple zero (000).
      

        There are many ways in which you can transform your home into an asthma-friendly environment.
      

        If you have an allergy, visit your doctor before you travel, especially if you are at risk of a severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis) or an asthma attack.
      

        For unexpected after-hours medical issues, there are telephone helplines, pharmacies, after-hours medical clinics or doctors who can visit you at home.
      

        Allergy testing is used to find which substances provoke an allergic reaction.
      

        Anaphylaxis is a severe allergic reaction that requires urgent medical attention.
      

        Pregnant women with asthma need to continue to take their asthma medication as it is important to the health of both mother and baby that the mother's asthma is under control.
      

        If your child has asthma, the childcare centre or school should have relevant action plans and staff trained to deal with asthma emergencies.
      

        Careful diagnosis of adult onset asthma is important, because the symptoms can be confused with other conditions.
      

        Many people with asthma find their symptoms can worsen when they are exposed to certain allergens like house dust mite, animal dander, pollen and mould.
      

        Asthma triggered by exercise can be prevented with medication and by preparing for exercise and physical activity.
      

        Asthma affects about one in 10 teenagers in Australia.
      

        Before taking your trip, visit your doctor to make sure your asthma is under control well before you leave.
      

        Asthma attacks need urgent emergency first aid. In an emergency, always call triple zero (000).
      

        Asthma cannot be cured, but with good management people with asthma can lead normal, active lives.
      

        Parents and children talk about some of the factors that can cause a child's asthma to flare up.
      

        An asthma action plan can help you take control of your asthma and feel confident managing it.
      

        Your doctor will prescribe the correct medications that can either help to relieve or prevent the symptoms of asthma.
      

        There are many ways in which you can transform your home into an asthma-friendly environment.
      

        Doctors do not have a single test to diagnose asthma so your doctor must understand your symptoms and eliminate other possible causes of your symptoms
      

        Eczema can vary in severity, and symptoms may flare up or subside from day to day.
      

        Find out when thunderstorm asthma events take place, risks, symptoms and how to protect yourself and others. What people with hay fever and asthma should know.
      

        Hay fever is an allergic reaction to airborne allergens that can occur at any time of the year.
      

        Asthma triggers are substances, conditions or activities that lead to symptoms of asthma.
      

        The immune system remembers every germ it has ever overcome.
      

        A Consumer Medicines Information (CMI) leaflet gives you accurate information about the safety of your medication and how best to take it.
      

        Pollen allergies cause seasonal hay fever and asthma and can be treated with antihistamines, nasal sprays or asthma medication
      

        Get the most out of your consultation by preparing for your health or medical appointment. 
      

        The respiratory system takes up oxygen from the air we breathe and expels the unwanted carbon dioxide.
      

        To get the most out of the conversation with your doctor, nurse or other healthcare provider, it is best to be open about providing information and to speak up if you don?t understand.
      

        Watch Mohamed's story and hear how his hay fever turned to asthma after a thunderstorm asthma event.
      

        If you have an allergy, visit your doctor before you travel, especially if you are at risk of a severe allergic reaction (anaphylaxis) or an asthma attack.
      

        Immediate telephone assistance is available for all kinds of emergencies.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        You can help your child overcome anxiety by taking their fears seriously and encouraging them to talk about their feelings.
      

        Anxiety disorders are common mental health problems that affect many people.
      

        Anxiety disorders are common, affecting about one in ten with persistent, excessive worrying that can hinder their ability to function. They may worry constantly about things that do not warrant it or that may never happen.   
      

        In this video clip, participants discuss the various forms of treatment and support they have received from medical professionals as well as from other sources. Some of the strategies for managing anxiety are explored, including techniques such as physical activity, breathing exercises, and sticking to a routine.
      

        The most important thing is to recognise the signs and symptoms and seek support.
      

        Fatigue is a feeling of constant tiredness or lack of energy. Causes include illness, health conditions, psychological and lifestyle factors. Find out more about symptoms, diagnosis and treatment.
      

        Fear is a natural human emotion, and it is something that everyone experiences in their lifetime. What matters most is how you fight your fears, and whether you let them affect your life. 
      

        Worrying can be constructive if it helps you to work out possible solutions to a problem, but some people are troubled by excessive anxiety.
      

        Learning all about anxiety is central to recovery.
      

        Self-harm and self-injury is when people hurt themselves on purpose, usually in response to intense emotional pain or negative feelings, thoughts or memories. 
      

        Stress affects people in different ways, but a balanced lifestyle can help you manage everyday stress.
      

        Having friends and other social connections is good for your health and wellbeing.
      

        Anxiety disorders are common, affecting about one in ten with persistent, excessive worrying that can hinder their ability to function. They may worry constantly about things that do not warrant it or that may never happen.   
      

        In this video clip, participants discuss the various forms of treatment and support they have received from medical professionals as well as from other sources. Some of the strategies for managing anxiety are explored, including techniques such as physical activity, breathing exercises, and sticking to a routine.
      

        Fear is a natural human emotion, and it is something that everyone experiences in their lifetime. What matters most is how you fight your fears, and whether you let them affect your life. 
      

        Obsessive compulsive disorder can have a profound effect on a person's life.
      

        Living with a person with OCD can have a major impact on family and friends.
      

        Anxiety disorders are common, affecting about one in ten with persistent, excessive worrying that can hinder their ability to function. They may worry constantly about things that do not warrant it or that may never happen.   
      

        In this video clip, participants discuss the various forms of treatment and support they have received from medical professionals as well as from other sources. Some of the strategies for managing anxiety are explored, including techniques such as physical activity, breathing exercises, and sticking to a routine.
      

        Dizziness is generally treatable and rarely indicates serious brain disease.
      

        Fear is a natural human emotion, and it is something that everyone experiences in their lifetime. What matters most is how you fight your fears, and whether you let them affect your life. 
      

        Without treatment, frequent and prolonged panic attacks can be severely disabling.
      

        Panic disorder is not the same as anxiety or a single panic attack. Symptoms of panic disorder include frequent and unexpected panic attacks.
      

        A person with agoraphobia is afraid to leave familiar environments, because they are afraid of having a panic attack.
      

        Anxiety disorders are common, affecting about one in ten with persistent, excessive worrying that can hinder their ability to function. They may worry constantly about things that do not warrant it or that may never happen.   
      

        In this video clip, participants discuss the various forms of treatment and support they have received from medical professionals as well as from other sources. Some of the strategies for managing anxiety are explored, including techniques such as physical activity, breathing exercises, and sticking to a routine.
      

        With appropriate treatment, it is possible to overcome claustrophobia or any other phobia.
      

        About one in six people have a significant fear that prevents them from flying, so fear of flying is common.
      

        Fear is a natural human emotion, and it is something that everyone experiences in their lifetime. What matters most is how you fight your fears, and whether you let them affect your life. 
      

        A person with social phobia experiences anxiety in situations where they are likely to be scrutinised and observed by others.
      

        Anxiety disorders are common, affecting about one in ten with persistent, excessive worrying that can hinder their ability to function. They may worry constantly about things that do not warrant it or that may never happen.   
      

        In this video clip, participants discuss the various forms of treatment and support they have received from medical professionals as well as from other sources. Some of the strategies for managing anxiety are explored, including techniques such as physical activity, breathing exercises, and sticking to a routine.
      

        Fear is a natural human emotion, and it is something that everyone experiences in their lifetime. What matters most is how you fight your fears, and whether you let them affect your life. 
      

        Traumatic events usually happen quickly and chaotically. A near-miss experience occurs when you are involved in a traumatic event where you think you will die or be badly hurt, but are not. This can have a deep psychological impact, sometimes with lasting effects
      

        People with post-traumatic stress disorder often experience feelings of panic or extreme fear, which may resemble what was felt during the traumatic event.
      

        If you have survived a traumatic event, whether you were injured or not, it's important to recognise that trauma also causes emotional harm. Survival is often associated with complex emotional reactions that cause distress and make it hard to resume everyday life after the event. These are known as ‘survivor reactions’.
      

        Some survivors of torture and trauma live with their memories for years, or even for the rest of their lives.
      

        There are things you can do to try to help someone who has been through a distressing or frightening event.
      

        It is normal to have strong emotional or physical reactions after a distressing or frightening event, and help is available.
      

        Babies and toddlers can be as affected by trauma as any other family member.
      

        Preschoolers may not have the words but will show their distress at traumatic events through changes in behaviour and functioning.
      

        Tell your child the facts about a distressing or frightening experience using language they can understand.
      

        When a family is affected by trauma, everyone will react in a different way.
      

        Children look to their parents or carers to judge how to deal with a crisis.
      

        A teenager may be deeply upset by a traumatic event, but not share their feelings with their parents.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.
Whether it's health conditions, health services or tips for healthy living, you can find it here.
Be a life-maker. Help make the life of a child – and family – possible by becoming an egg or sperm donor with Public Fertility Care.
To bridge the gap in women's healthcare, we are leading the delivery of a program of work to change the way women’s health issues are treated
Mental Health and Wellbeing Local is a new service that supports Victorian adults to get mental health and wellbeing treatment, care and support closer to home.
The Community Pharmacist pilot allows people to receive some treatments at a local pharmacy without needing to see a doctor to get a prescription.
Getting checked that is. Sex is a normal part of life. If you’re sexually active, get a sexual health check at least once a year.
Oral health resources to help you care for your child or teenager's teeth.
Community transmission is slowing in Victoria, but COVID continues to be a part of our lives. Follow the 6 steps to protect yourself and those most at risk.
Everything you need to know about the pregnancy journey, from conception through to birth.
Food poisoning is caused by eating contaminated food and affects a large number of Australians every year.
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        Every person diagnosed with asthma should have an asthma action plan.
      

        Careful diagnosis of adult onset asthma is important, because the symptoms can be confused with other conditions.
      

        Many people with asthma find their symptoms can worsen when they are exposed to certain allergens like house dust mite, animal dander, pollen and mould.
      

        Watch this overview about thunderstorm asthma to be prepared this pollen season
      

        Asthma attacks need urgent emergency first aid. In an emergency, always call triple zero (000).
      

        Asthma cannot be cured, but with good management people with asthma can lead normal, active lives.
      

        Learn about thunderstorm asthma and the 4 steps of asthma first aid.
      

        Doctors do not have a single test to diagnose asthma so your doctor must understand your symptoms and eliminate other possible causes of your symptoms
      

        Find out when thunderstorm asthma events take place, risks, symptoms and how to protect yourself and others. What people with hay fever and asthma should know.
      

        Learn about how a person with hay fever may be affected during a thunderstorm asthma event.
      

        Asthma triggers are substances, conditions or activities that lead to symptoms of asthma.
      

        The respiratory system takes up oxygen from the air we breathe and expels the unwanted carbon dioxide.
      

        Professor McDonald explains thunderstorm asthma
      

        Watch Mohamed's story and hear how his hay fever turned to asthma after a thunderstorm asthma event.
      

        Thunderstorm asthma overview
      

        Pregnant women with asthma need to continue to take their asthma medication as it is important to the health of both mother and baby that the mother's asthma is under control.
      

        If your child has asthma, the childcare centre or school should have relevant action plans and staff trained to deal with asthma emergencies.
      

        Asthma affects about one in 10 teenagers in Australia.
      

        Watch this overview about thunderstorm asthma to be prepared this pollen season
      

        Learn about thunderstorm asthma and the 4 steps of asthma first aid.
      

        Parents and children talk about some of the factors that can cause a child's asthma to flare up.
      

        Understanding asthma triggers for your child can help to reduce the risk of an asthma attack
      

        Exposure to second-hand smoke increases the risk of children developing asthma and provokes more frequent asthma in children with asthma.
      

        Thunderstorm asthma overview
      

        If your child has asthma, the childcare centre or school should have relevant action plans and staff trained to deal with asthma emergencies.
      

        Every person diagnosed with asthma should have an asthma action plan.
      

        It is important to identify any foods or food chemicals that may trigger your asthma, but this must be done under strict medical supervision.
      

        Breathing in other people's cigarette smoke can be harmful to a person with asthma, especially a child.
      

        Watch this overview about thunderstorm asthma to be prepared this pollen season
      

        Before taking your trip, visit your doctor to make sure your asthma is under control well before you leave.
      

        Some industries are more likely to affect a person with asthma because of the triggers in the environment.
      

        Learn about thunderstorm asthma and the 4 steps of asthma first aid.
      

        There are many ways in which you can transform your home into an asthma-friendly environment.
      

        Find out when thunderstorm asthma events take place, risks, symptoms and how to protect yourself and others. What people with hay fever and asthma should know.
      

        Learn about how a person with hay fever may be affected during a thunderstorm asthma event.
      

        Asthma triggers are substances, conditions or activities that lead to symptoms of asthma.
      

        Professor McDonald explains thunderstorm asthma
      

        Watch Mohamed's story and hear how his hay fever turned to asthma after a thunderstorm asthma event.
      

        Thunderstorm asthma overview
      

        Aspergillus is a fungus that commonly grows on rotting vegetation. It can cause asthma symptoms.
      

        Every person diagnosed with asthma should have an asthma action plan.
      

        It is important you discuss your asthma and preferred therapies with both your doctor and complementary therapist.
      

        Watch this overview about thunderstorm asthma to be prepared this pollen season
      

        Asthma attacks need urgent emergency first aid. In an emergency, always call triple zero (000).
      

        Learn about thunderstorm asthma and the 4 steps of asthma first aid.
      

        An asthma action plan can help you take control of your asthma and feel confident managing it.
      

        Your doctor will prescribe the correct medications that can either help to relieve or prevent the symptoms of asthma.
      

        Learn about how a person with hay fever may be affected during a thunderstorm asthma event.
      

        Cortisol helps to maintain blood pressure, immune function and the body's anti-inflammatory processes.
      

        Asthma triggers are substances, conditions or activities that lead to symptoms of asthma.
      

        Professor McDonald explains thunderstorm asthma
      

        Thunderstorm asthma is triggered when there is high amounts of grass pollen in the air. It can result in people wheezing, feeling short of breath, and tight in the chest with coughing.
      

        Watch the video where medical experts, Dr Michael Sutherland and Professor Frank Thien, explain who is at risk of thunderstorm asthma.
      

        Thunderstorm asthma overview
      

        For unexpected after-hours medical issues, there are telephone helplines, pharmacies, after-hours medical clinics or doctors who can visit you at home.
      

        Anaphylaxis is a severe allergic reaction that requires urgent medical attention.
      

        If your child has asthma, the childcare centre or school should have relevant action plans and staff trained to deal with asthma emergencies.
      

        Every person diagnosed with asthma should have an asthma action plan.
      

        Careful diagnosis of adult onset asthma is important, because the symptoms can be confused with other conditions.
      

        Many people with asthma find their symptoms can worsen when they are exposed to certain allergens like house dust mite, animal dander, pollen and mould.
      

        Asthma triggered by exercise can be prevented with medication and by preparing for exercise and physical activity.
      

        Asthma affects about one in 10 teenagers in Australia.
      

        Watch this overview about thunderstorm asthma to be prepared this pollen season
      

        Before taking your trip, visit your doctor to make sure your asthma is under control well before you leave.
      

        Asthma attacks need urgent emergency first aid. In an emergency, always call triple zero (000).
      

        Asthma cannot be cured, but with good management people with asthma can lead normal, active lives.
      

        Learn about thunderstorm asthma and the 4 steps of asthma first aid.
      

        Parents and children talk about some of the factors that can cause a child's asthma to flare up.
      

        An asthma action plan can help you take control of your asthma and feel confident managing it.
      

        Your doctor will prescribe the correct medications that can either help to relieve or prevent the symptoms of asthma.
      

        There are many ways in which you can transform your home into an asthma-friendly environment.
      

        Doctors do not have a single test to diagnose asthma so your doctor must understand your symptoms and eliminate other possible causes of your symptoms
      

        Eczema can vary in severity, and symptoms may flare up or subside from day to day.
      

        Find out when thunderstorm asthma events take place, risks, symptoms and how to protect yourself and others. What people with hay fever and asthma should know.
      

        Learn about how a person with hay fever may be affected during a thunderstorm asthma event.
      

        Cortisol helps to maintain blood pressure, immune function and the body's anti-inflammatory processes.
      

        Asthma triggers are substances, conditions or activities that lead to symptoms of asthma.
      

        The immune system remembers every germ it has ever overcome.
      

        Chronic condition management includes positive lifestyle factors like a healthy diet, regular exercise, good sleep and social support.
      

        A Consumer Medicines Information (CMI) leaflet gives you accurate information about the safety of your medication and how best to take it.
      

        Pollen allergies cause seasonal hay fever and asthma and can be treated with antihistamines, nasal sprays or asthma medication
      

        Get the most out of your consultation by preparing for your health or medical appointment. 
      

        The respiratory system takes up oxygen from the air we breathe and expels the unwanted carbon dioxide.
      

        To get the most out of the conversation with your doctor, nurse or other healthcare provider, it is best to be open about providing information and to speak up if you don?t understand.
      

        Professor McDonald explains thunderstorm asthma
      

        Watch Mohamed's story and hear how his hay fever turned to asthma after a thunderstorm asthma event.
      

        Thunderstorm asthma is triggered when there is high amounts of grass pollen in the air. It can result in people wheezing, feeling short of breath, and tight in the chest with coughing.
      

        Watch the video where medical experts, Dr Michael Sutherland and Professor Frank Thien, explain who is at risk of thunderstorm asthma.
      

        Thunderstorm asthma overview
      

        Immediate telephone assistance is available for all kinds of emergencies.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        A person with Asperger syndrome often has trouble understanding the emotions of other people.
      

        ASD is a complex disorder that affects a person's ability to interact with the world around them.
      

        Autism spectrum disorder is a lifelong condition, but you are not on your own and there are plenty of professionals and groups who can help.
      

        I'm Max and I have autism and that's ok!
      

        We put the "awe" into autism!
      

        An adult with properly managed ADHD often shows great imagination and creative flair.
      

        Untreated behavioural disorders in children may mean they grow up to be dysfunctional adults.
      

        Early childhood interventions help babies and young children with developmental delays or disabilities.
      

        For children diagnosed with a disability, getting the support they need as early as possible will give them the best chance of minimising the long-term effects of the disability. 
      

        I'm Max and I have autism and that's ok!
      

        We put the "awe" into autism!
      

        An adult with properly managed ADHD often shows great imagination and creative flair.
      

        Children with ADHD may benefit from medication or other therapies, or a combination of both.
      

        Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a behavioural disorder, not an illness or a sign of low intelligence.
      

        Untreated behavioural disorders in children may mean they grow up to be dysfunctional adults.
      

        People with borderline personality disorder may exhibit extreme behaviour, such as repeated self-mutilation or taking overdoses of medication.
      

        Children with untreated conduct disorder (CD) are at increased risk of problems including substance use, personality disorders and mental illnesses.
      

        Oppositional defiant disorder is a childhood behavioural problem characterised by constant disobedience and hostility.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        People can manage their arthritis using medication, physiotherapy, exercise and self management techniques.
      

        Pain is our built-in alarm system. It makes us aware that something might be going wrong in our body. However, there are many things you can do to deal effectively with persistent pain.
      

        Pain is our built-in alarm system. It makes us aware that something might be going wrong in our body. However, there are many things you can do to deal effectively with persistent pain.
      

        Living with persistent pain isn’t easy. Your doctor can help you balance your pain, your treatment and hurdles you encounter in life.
      

        No special diet or 'miracle food' can cure arthritis, but some conditions may be helped by avoiding or including certain foods.
      

        Exercise can reduce some of the symptoms of arthritis, and improve joint mobility and strength.
      

        Pain is our built-in alarm system. It makes us aware that something might be going wrong in our body. However, there are many things you can do to deal effectively with persistent pain.
      

        People of all ages and fitness levels can practice tai chi and may gain health benefits.
      

        People can manage their arthritis using medication, physiotherapy, exercise and self management techniques.
      

        Knee replacement surgery removes a diseased knee joint and replaces it with an artificial joint.
      

        Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medicines should always be used cautiously and for the shortest time possible.
      

        Always see your doctor if you have ongoing pain to find the best pain-management option for you.
      

        Pain is our built-in alarm system. It makes us aware that something might be going wrong in our body. However, there are many things you can do to deal effectively with persistent pain.
      

        Ankylosing spondylitis (AS) is a type of inflammatory arthritis that targets the joints of the spine.
      

        One child in every 1,000 in Australia is diagnosed with juvenile arthritis. It is one of the most common chronic conditions to affect children.
      

        People can manage their arthritis using medication, physiotherapy, exercise and self management techniques.
      

        Fibromyalgia is a condition associated with widespread pain and tenderness.
      

        While most other types of arthritis develop slowly, an attack of gout happens suddenly, often overnight.
      

        Many people will experience symptoms of osteoarthritis as they age.
      

        Typical symptoms of polymyalgia rheumatica include severe muscle aches and stiffness, particularly in the neck, shoulders and thighs.
      

        Reactive arthritis is a form of arthritis that occurs as a result of some bacterial infections.
      

        Early treatment of rheumatoid arthritis is important in  helping you manage the condition more effectively.
      

        People can manage their arthritis using medication, physiotherapy, exercise and self management techniques.
      

        Most people can resume normal activities around three weeks after an arthroscopy.
      

        Back pain is common. Some people will develop back pain that is persistent (lasts more than three months). There are many things that you can do to live well with back pain. 
      

        A chronic or long term illness means the person has to adjust to the demands of the illness and the therapy used to treat the condition.
      

        Elbow pain and can result from overuse in a range of sports or occupations.
      

        The hip joint is complicated to allow a wide range of motion while still supporting the weight of the body.
      

        A joint is the part of the body where two or more bones meet to allow movement.
      

        Treatments like physiotherapy, osteopathy or remedial massage can generally help neck and shoulder pain.
      

        Shoulder pain is common in our community. The good news is that with appropriate treatment pain will improve so you can get back to doing the things you enjoy.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        Bipolar disorder is a type of psychosis, which means the person?s perception of reality is altered. It is characterised by extreme mood swings
      

        The most important thing is to recognise the signs and symptoms and seek support.
      

        In this video clip, participants discuss the early signs of depression. They also share some of the events that lead up to their diagnosis.
      

        Postnatal depression can happen either a few days or weeks after the birth, with a slow or sudden onset.
      

        Cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) can help you change unhelpful or unhealthy habits of thinking, feeling and behaving.
      

        The most important thing is to recognise the signs and symptoms and seek support.
      

        Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) can be an effective treatment for some types of mental illness.
      

        Recognising that your child has a mental health problem and seeking professional support are important first steps to take.
      

        In this video clip, participants discuss the early signs of depression. They also share some of the events that lead up to their diagnosis.
      

        A case manager or key clinician looks after your interests while you are a client of public (government) mental health services.
      

        A mental health treatment plan explains the support provided by each member of a person's healthcare team.
      

        Having friends and other social connections is good for your health and wellbeing.
      

        Improve your understanding of anxiety and depression, then take action.
      

        Older people are at greater risk of developing mental health conditions because of the cumulative effect of numerous risk factors, including chronic illness and isolation.
      

        Research shows that keeping active can help lift mood, improve sleeping patterns, and increase energy levels.
      

        In this video clip, participants discuss the early signs of depression. They also share some of the events that lead up to their diagnosis.
      

        Self-medicating with alcohol doesn't solve the causes of depression, which is common in rural communities.
      

        The grief felt by family and friends can be deeper when the cause of death is suicide.
      

        Self-harm and self-injury is when people hurt themselves on purpose, usually in response to intense emotional pain or negative feelings, thoughts or memories. 
      

        In Australia, suicide is the leading cause of death for people aged between 15 and 44. We can all play a role in preventing suicide by looking out for possible warning signs and reaching out.
      

        Some mental health conditions are associated with an increased risk of suicide. Protective factors can reduce suicide risk, such as mental health care, counselling and social support.
      

        All suicide threats are serious. You don't have to be a trained professional to help a person contemplating suicide.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        Itching scalp can be caused by a number of conditions, including dandruff, seborrhoeic dermatitis and psoriasis.
      

        Hair transplant surgery involves taking skin from parts of the scalp where hair is growing and grafting it to the thinning or bald areas, or areas of trauma.
      

        No product can prevent head lice, but regular checks can help prevent the spread.
      

        All men and women develop progressive patterned hair loss as they grow older.
      

        Pubic lice (crabs) spread through skin-to-skin contact and can cause small red areas, sores and itching.
      

        Human hair grows one centimetre every month.
      

        Our fingernails grow about three times faster than our toenails.
      

        Tinea is contagious and can be spread by skin-to-skin contact or indirectly through towels, clothes or floors.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        Alzheimer's disease is the most common form of dementia in Australia, accounting for about two thirds of cases.
      

        Dementia is more common in people over 65, but it is not a normal part of ageing.
      

        Studies of the brains of people with Down syndrome reveal that, by the age of 40, almost all develop the brain changes characteristic of Alzheimer's disease.
      

        A correct diagnosis of dementia at an early stage is important for early treatment, support and planning for the future.
      

        Depression makes it harder for a person with dementia to remember things and enjoy their life.
      

        Dementia is not a normal part of ageing and can happen to anybody.
      

        Services are available in Victoria for people with dementia, and their partners, carers and friends.
      

        The most important way to help young people cope with dementia is to talk openly and be willing to listen.
      

        Participating in suitable activities can help a person with dementia to achieve purpose and pleasure.
      

        Helping the person with dementia adjust to residential care can be a new role for carers.
      

        Deciding to place a person with dementia into residential care is a difficult decision.
      

        Caring for someone with dementia who lives alone can be difficult, but support is available
      

        Caring for a person with dementia will become more difficult if the carer is worn down.
      

        Services are available in Victoria for people with dementia, and their partners, carers and friends.
      

        Participating in suitable activities can help a person with dementia to achieve purpose and pleasure.
      

        Providing a calm environment for the person with dementia can help to reduce the impact of changes to behaviour patterns.
      

        Carers need to pay attention to how they present themselves to the person with dementia.
      

        Incontinence may occur in people with dementia for many reasons.
      

        Some people with dementia may not recognise their declining ability to drive.
      

        Planning ahead can make it easier for families and carers to manage the affairs of a person with dementia.
      

        A number of strategies can help encourage healthy and nutritious eating for people with dementia.
      

        People with dementia continue to need loving, safe relationships and caring touch.
      

        People with dementia can forget about washing themselves or changing their clothes.
      

        Safety checks and modifications around the home can help ensure the safety of a person with dementia.
      

        Adopting a 'brain healthy' lifestyle may reduce your risk of dementia in later life.
      

        Physical activity, a healthy diet and mental exercises may help maintain your brain’s functions, including memory.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        A step-by-step guide to support you through COVID-19 to your recovery. 
      

        What to do if you're a contact of someone with COVID-19.
      

        Antivirals are available for eligible people to treat COVID-19.
      

        Find out about the long-term symptoms and effects of COVID-19.
      

        Learn about what the symptoms of COVID-19 are, how it spreads and what viral shedding is.
      

        How to book your COVID-19 booster appointment and advice about vaccination.
      

        How to get a test for COVID-19 in Victoria.
      

        Face masks can prevent COVID-19 transmission.
      

        Find out how ventilation helps you lower the spread of COVID-19.
      

        Being prepared is the best way to reduce your risk from COVID-19 as an older person, including making a plan to access antivirals.
      

        Information and resources for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Victorians. 
      

        Information about COVID-19 for people with disability and people caring for them.
      

        Find out about travelling to and from Victoria, including both interstate and international advice.
      

        ኮቪድ-19ን ለመቆጣጠር እና ለመከላከል የሚሆን ምክር።
      

        نصائح للتعامل مع مرض كوفيد-١٩ والحماية منه
      

        COVID-19 নিয়ন্ত্রণ এবং সুরক্ষার জন্য পরামর্শ।
      

        ကိုဗစ်-၁၉ကို စီမံခန့်ခွဲခြင်းနှင့် ကာကွယ်ခြင်းအတွက် အကြံပြုချက်။
      

        Wëët tënë mɛ̈c ku gël/tiët në abaŋde COVID-19.
      

        Information about COVID-19 in your language.
      

        توصی19ه هایی برای مدیریت و محافظت در برابر کووید-
      

        Payo para sa pamamahala at pagprotekta laban sa COVID-19.
      

        Συμβουλές για την διαχείριση και την προστασία από τον ιό COVID-19.
      

        कोविड-19 के प्रबंधन और इससे सुरक्षा के लिए सलाह।
      

        Raccomandazioni su come gestire e proteggerti dal COVID-19.
      

        ដំបូន្មានសម្រាប់ការគ្រប់គ្រង និងការការពារប្រឆាំងទល់នឹង COVID-19។
      

        COVID-19 관리 및 보호를 위한 권고사항.
      

        Nasihat untuk menguruskan COVID-19 dan melindungi diri daripadanya.
      

        Parir biex timmaniġġja u tipproteġi lilek innifsek mill-COVID-19.
      

        COVID-19 विरुद्ध व्यवस्थापन र सुरक्षाको लागि सल्लाह।
      

        COVID-19 ਨਾਲ ਨਜਿੱਠਣ ਅਤੇ ਇਸ ਤੋਂ ਸੁਰੱਖਿਆ ਲਈ ਸਲਾਹ।
      

        应对及防范 COVID-19 的建议。
      

        කෝවිඩ්-19ට එරෙහිව ආරක්ෂා වීම හා එය කළමනාකරණය කිරීම පිළිබඳ උපදෙස්.
      

        Consejos para manejar y protegerse contra el COVID-19.
      

        கோவிட்-19 நோய்த்தொற்றை நிர்வகிப்பதற்கும், அதிலிருந்து பாதுகாப்பதற்குமான ஆலோசனை.
      

        คำแนะนำสำหรับการจัดการและการป้องกันโรคติดเชื้อไวรัส COVID-19
      

        管理、預防感染新冠病毒之建議
      

        COVID-19'u yönetme ve ondan korunmaya yönelik öneriler.
      

        COVID-19 کو سنبھالنے اور اس کے خلاف تحفظ کے لیے معلومات
      

        Lời khuyên để kiểm soát và bảo vệ chống lại COVID-19.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        During fetal development, the diaphragm or abdominal wall may fail to properly fuse, allowing the abdominal organs to protrude.
      

        ASD is a complex disorder that affects a person's ability to interact with the world around them.
      

        Folic acid taken before conception, and during at least the first 4 weeks of pregnancy, can prevent around 7 out of 10 cases of neural tube defects.
      

        Most cleft palates and cleft lips can be repaired so that appearance and speech develop normally.
      

        Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) can affect a child's normal growth and development, including normal growth of the genitals.
      

        Some congenital heart defects are mild and cause no significant disturbance to the way the heart functions.
      

        Most children born with cri du chat syndrome have moderate intellectual disability, with varying degrees of speech delay and some health problems.
      

        Around 95 per cent of babies born with developmental dysplasia of the hip can be successfully treated.
      

        Too much amniotic fluid surrounding the baby during pregnancy (polyhydramnios) may indicate the presence of defects of the digestive tract.
      

        With the support and opportunities available to them today, most people with Down syndrome are able to achieve and participate as valued members of their community.
      

        Dwarfism refers to a group of conditions characterised by shorter than normal skeletal growth.
      

        The World Health Organization recommends that pregnant women should avoid alcohol.
      

        The facts about fragile X syndrome are complicated, and parents and family members are invited to ask their doctor to refer them to a genetics clinic.
      

        All children with severe haemophilia are given preventative treatment with infusions of blood products before they have a bleed.
      

        Kabuki syndrome affects males and females equally and there is no cure.
      

        Neurofibromatosis is caused by faulty genes, which may be inherited or have spontaneously mutated at conception.
      

        Noonan syndrome is a genetic condition that usually includes heart abnormalities and characteristic facial features.
      

        PKU is an inherited disorder that prevents the normal breakdown of a protein found in some foods.
      

        A feature of Prader-Willi syndrome is the child's excessive appetite, which often leads to obesity.
      

        Folate can prevent up to 70 per cent of spina bifida cases if taken daily for one month before conception and during the first three months of pregnancy.
      

        Syringomyelia is the growth of a cyst in the spinal cord that may result in paraplegia or quadriplegia if not treated.
      

        Tay-Sachs disease is a serious genetic disorder common in Ashkenazi Jews and French-Canadians.
      

        Thalassaemia is an inherited blood disorder that can cause anaemia or death if not treated.
      

        Treacher Collins syndrome is a genetic disorder that affects growth and development of the head, causing facial defects and hearing loss.
      

        Children affected by trisomy usually have a range of birth defects, including delayed development and intellectual disabilities.
      

        Common birth defects of the urinary system include hypospadias, obstructive defects of the renal pelvis and renal agenesis.
      

        Williams syndrome often goes undiagnosed, which means that some people with the disorder fail to get the support and treatment they need until later in life.
      

        It can be dangerous for a pregnant woman to stop taking prescription drugs if she has a medical condition or becomes ill.
      

        The World Health Organization recommends that pregnant women should avoid alcohol.
      

        Rubella is a mild illness for most people, but very dangerous for pregnant women and their babies.
      

        Problems only occur if a woman becomes infected with parasites that cause toxoplasmosis for the first time while pregnant.
      

        You can freeze your eggs for medical reasons or for reasons that are more to do with your life circumstances.
      

        Genetic services can help people who are affected by, or who are at risk of, inherited conditions or birth defects, to make informed choices about their healthcare.
      

        Immunisation can protect a woman and her unborn baby against many infectious diseases.
      

        Every newborn baby in Australia is offered a test for the rare medical conditions of phenylketonuria, hypothyroidism, cystic fibrosis and congenital adrenal hyperplasia. 
      

        Maternal serum screening can indicate increased risk of abnormalities in the unborn child, but is not a diagnosis.
      

        Ultrasound is used during pregnancy to check the baby's development and to help pick up any abnormalities.
      

        Chorionic villus sampling (CVS) is a pregnancy test that checks the baby for some abnormalities.
      

        Congenital anomalies (birth defects) are structural or functional differences in a baby’s body or genetics that are there before birth.
      

        Disease clusters are rare but can cause community concern about the possible effects of exposure to environmental hazards.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        Did you know deaths from injury and preventable diseases are more common for men than women in Australia? We’ve got some practical, expert advice to improve your chance of living a long, healthy life.
      

        Age affects the fertility of both men and women, and is the single biggest factor affecting a woman?s chance to conceive and have a healthy baby.
      

        IVF (in-vitro-fertilization) and ICSI (intracytoplasmic sperm injection) are assisted reproductive treatment (ART) procedures in which fertilisation of an egg occurs outside the body.
      

        Different methods of contraception available in Australia - includes LARC implants and IUDs, injections, contraceptive pills, condoms, diaphragm, vaginal ring, sterilisation, natural and withdrawal. 
      

        Contraceptive injections to stop sperm production are not yet available in Australia, but studies suggest that they may provide a safe, effective and reversible method of contraception in the future.
      

        Information about male (external) condoms - includes how to use condoms to reduce your risk of sexually transmissible infections (STIs) and pregnancy during sex, how they work and where to get them.
      

        Having a vasectomy does not affect a person's ability to produce sex hormones, enjoy sex or reach orgasm.
      

        This page shows you where to  find translated information about the different methods of contraception (how to prevent getting pregnant) available in Australia
      

        By donating eggs, sperm or embryos, you are giving someone the chance to start their own family.
      

        Epididymitis is an infection causing inflammation of the epididymis. All about causes, symptoms, diagnosis, treatment, complications, chronic epididymitis and where to get help.
      

        A couple isn't suspected of fertility problems until they have tried and failed to conceive for one year.
      

        Did you know deaths from injury and preventable diseases are more common for men than women in Australia? We’ve got some practical, expert advice to improve your chance of living a long, healthy life.
      

        The effects of androgen deficiency depend on how severe the deficiency is, its cause and the age at which the deficiency begins.
      

        A couple isn't suspected of fertility problems until they have tried and failed to conceive for one year.
      

        One of the treatments for prostate cancer is androgen deprivation therapy (previously called hormone therapy).
      

        New life begins when a male sex cell (sperm) fertilises a female egg (ovum) within the female reproductive system.
      

        Did you know deaths from injury and preventable diseases are more common for men than women in Australia? We’ve got some practical, expert advice to improve your chance of living a long, healthy life.
      

        Men should see their doctor for regular medical check-ups.
      

        A lack of health awareness and an unwillingness to adopt a healthier lifestyle puts men at a health disadvantage.
      

        Adjusting to the many changes that happen around puberty can be difficult for both parents and young people.
      

        New life begins when a male sex cell (sperm) fertilises a female egg (ovum) within the female reproductive system.
      

        Safe sex is sexual contact that doesn't involve the exchange of semen, vaginal fluids or blood between partners.
      

        Did you know deaths from injury and preventable diseases are more common for men than women in Australia? We’ve got some practical, expert advice to improve your chance of living a long, healthy life.
      

        Cosmetic genital surgery involves reshaping the labia, vulva or penis to alter their size or shape.
      

        Men with diabetes are more prone to problems with erectile dysfunction or impotence.
      

        Common causes of erectile dysfunction include physical illness, anxiety and too much alcohol.
      

        Premature ejaculation is the most common sexual problem in in the world.
      

        Did you know deaths from injury and preventable diseases are more common for men than women in Australia? We’ve got some practical, expert advice to improve your chance of living a long, healthy life.
      

        Chlamydia is a sexually transmissible infection that is caused by the bacteria Chlamydia trachomatis.
      

        Non-specific urethritis (NSU) means any inflammation of a man's urethra that is not caused by gonorrhoea.
      

        Prostate cancer can be treated in a variety of ways, so discuss treatment options with your doctor.
      

        One of the treatments for prostate cancer is androgen deprivation therapy (previously called hormone therapy).
      

        Men with a family history of prostate cancer, or men who have had a raised test result in the past, will benefit most from regular testing.
      

        The prostate gland produces fluids that protect and feed sperm cells.
      

        Many men experience urinary changes as they age, which may be caused by inflammation or enlargement of the prostate gland.
      

        The aim of a radical prostatectomy is to remove the cancer before it spreads to other parts of the body.
      

        Surgery on the prostate gland can have many side effects, including erectile problems and urinary incontinence.
      

        Did you know deaths from injury and preventable diseases are more common for men than women in Australia? We’ve got some practical, expert advice to improve your chance of living a long, healthy life.
      

        The effects of androgen deficiency depend on how severe the deficiency is, its cause and the age at which the deficiency begins.
      

        Having a vasectomy does not affect a person's ability to produce sex hormones, enjoy sex or reach orgasm.
      

        Epididymitis is an infection causing inflammation of the epididymis. All about causes, symptoms, diagnosis, treatment, complications, chronic epididymitis and where to get help.
      

        A couple isn't suspected of fertility problems until they have tried and failed to conceive for one year.
      

        Chlamydia is a sexually transmissible infection that is caused by the bacteria Chlamydia trachomatis.
      

        If you injure your testicles, always seek urgent medical advice.
      

        Early diagnosis and treatment can cure almost all cases of testicular cancer.
      

        Men with an increased risk of testicular cancer should regularly examine their testicles for unusual lumps or swellings.
      

        Undescended testicles means that one or both testicles are missing from the scrotum.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        Orthoptists assist in the diagnosis and treatment of eye disease.
      

        Wearing eye protection appropriate for the task can significantly reduce the risk of injury.
      

        Regular eye tests or check-ups detect problems early, so you can have early treatment to minimise any permanent damage to your eyes.
      

        You can help prevent dry eyes and minimise the risk of tired or sore eyes while reading or using a computer.
      

        A person with vision loss needs to make adaptations in order to do some everyday activities.
      

        The eye's complicated design means that an image can pass through its many layers and end up crisply focused on the retina.
      

        If you are short-sighted, you will have trouble seeing objects clearly in the distance and they will appear blurry.
      

        Smoking is thought to be a factor in age-related macular degeneration and blindness.
      

        Blepharospasm means involuntary twitching, blinking, closure or squeezing of the eyelids.
      

        A cataract of the eye is like the lens of a camera becoming fogged up.
      

        People who are colourblind usually have difficulty with the colours green, yellow, orange and red
      

        Conjunctivitis is an eye infection caused by a bacteria or virus. Symptoms include eye redness, a discharge and swollen lids. Conjunctivitis is treated with antibacterial eye drops or ointment. Children must not attend school or child care if they have conjunctivitis.
      

        Without treatment, diabetic retinopathy can cause loss of vision and blindness.
      

        Giant cell arteritis is inflammation of the arteries that can cause sudden blindness in one or both eyes.
      

        Glaucoma can happen at any age and without early detection can lead to permanent vision loss and blindness.
      

        Optic neuritis is inflammation of the optic nerve that causes blurred, grey and dim vision.
      

        Retinitis pigmentosa is the collective name for a range of diseases that damage the retina and cause vision to deteriorate.
      

        A clean face and clean environment are the best protection against trachoma.
      

        Iritis can cause vision problems if it is not treated.
      

        A pterygium is a fleshy overgrowth of the conjunctiva that may affect one or both eyes.
      

        If a detached retina is not treated, it can lead to total blindness.
      

        Sjogren’s syndrome can be managed with medications and products such as artificial tears and saliva.
      

        A person suffering from dry eye syndrome does not have enough of the right kind of tears to keep the eye comfortable.
      

        Some eye floaters look like small dots, while others appear like threads or little hairy clumps.
      

        Always wear safety goggles or a face shield when handling liquid or powder chemicals.
      

        Don't try to remove a foreign body from your eye - go to your doctor or hospital emergency department for help.
      

        Some babies are born with a blocked tear duct, but other events, including infection and trauma to the nose, can cause a blocked tear duct.
      

        Flash burns are like sunburn in the eye and can affect both your eyes. Find out more.
      

        Styes may be red and sore, but they generally do not cause any damage to the eye or eyelids.
      

        Braille is a reading and writing system for blind and vision impaired people, made up of raised dots that can be ?read? by touch.
      

        A person with vision loss needs to make adaptations in order to do some everyday activities.
      

        Guide dogs are intelligent animals that thrive on the challenge of helping their handlers.
      

        Occupational therapy for people with vision impairment offers new strategies and alternative ways to do things.
      

        When you meet a person who is blind or has low vision, ask them if they want help.
      

        Many recreational activities can be reworked to suit a person who is blind or has low vision.
      

        There are many ways to improve home safety for people whose vision is deteriorating
      

        With planning and preparation, most social events can be adapted to suit people with vision loss.
      

        Guide dogs are specially bred and trained to enable people who are blind or vision impaired to achieve freedom and independence.
      

        Many sports can be adapted to suit people who are blind or have low vision.
      

        Corneal transplant surgery would not be possible without generous donors and their families, who have donated corneal tissue so that others may see.
      

        Orthoptists assist in the diagnosis and treatment of eye disease.
      

        Proper care of your contact lenses will help avoid irritation or damage to your eyes.
      

        During laser eye surgery, a computer-controlled laser is used to remove microscopic amounts of tissue from the front surface of the eye.
      

        Vision therapy is effective for everyone; however, its impact is greatest in children and young adults.
      

        Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a type of vision loss where there is a distortion or absence of the central field of vision.
      

        A person with vision loss needs to make adaptations in order to do some everyday activities.
      

        A significant amount of long-sightedness can lead to blurred vision, particularly for close objects.
      

        Refractive errors are common eye disorders causing blurry vision and are related to the focusing ability of your eyes.
      

        If you are short-sighted, you will have trouble seeing objects clearly in the distance and they will appear blurry.
      

        Neurological vision impairment (ABI VI) is vision loss caused by damage to the areas of the brain that are responsible for sight.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        Back pain is common. Some people will develop back pain that is persistent (lasts more than three months). There are many things that you can do to live well with back pain. 
      

        Most disc problems resolve without specific treatment.
      

        Children with back pain may grow into adults with chronic bad backs, so it is important to encourage sensible back care.
      

        Pain is our built-in alarm system. It makes us aware that something might be going wrong in our body. However, there are many things you can do to deal effectively with persistent pain.
      

        Treatments like physiotherapy, osteopathy or remedial massage can generally help neck and shoulder pain.
      

        Scoliosis is an abnormal sideways curve of the spine.
      

        Shoulder pain is common in our community. The good news is that with appropriate treatment pain will improve so you can get back to doing the things you enjoy.
      

        Most cases of tendonitis recover completely, but severe untreated tendonitis can lead to rupture of the tendon.
      

        Pain is our built-in alarm system. It makes us aware that something might be going wrong in our body. However, there are many things you can do to deal effectively with persistent pain.
      

        Living with persistent pain isn’t easy. Your doctor can help you balance your pain, your treatment and hurdles you encounter in life.
      

        Acromegaly is caused by an excess of growth hormone in adults, which causes the overgrowth of bones in the face, hands, feet and internal organs.
      

        A person with amyloidosis produces aggregates of insoluble protein that cannot be eliminated from the body.
      

        Bone cancer can develop as either a primary cancer, meaning that the cancer started in the bones, or a secondary cancer, meaning that the cancer started somewhere else and spread to the bones. 
      

        Common sites for bone fractures include the wrist, ankle and hip.
      

        Fibrous dysplasia causes abnormal growth or swelling of bone, but it is not a form of cancer.
      

        Most children and many adults with acute leukaemia can expect to be cured, while chronic leukaemia can be successfully managed.
      

        The severity of symptoms or how a child with McCune-Albright syndrome will be affected throughout life is difficult to predict.
      

        Multiple myeloma is cancer of plasma cells in the bone marrow.
      

        Osteomyelitis means an infection of bone which can either be recent or longstanding.
      

        Paget's disease of bone is a chronic condition that causes abnormal enlargement and weakening of bone.
      

        Rib injuries may include bruises, torn cartilage and bone fractures.
      

        Rickets is a preventable childhood bone disease caused by a lack of vitamin D.
      

        Scoliosis is an abnormal sideways curve of the spine.
      

        'Shin splints' refers to pain felt anywhere along the shinbone from knee to ankle.
      

        Treacher Collins syndrome is a genetic disorder that affects growth and development of the head, causing facial defects and hearing loss.
      

        Bone marrow is the spongy tissue in the hollow centres of a person?s long bones and is the blood cell 'factory'.
      

        The adult skeleton is made up of 206 bones, which provide the structure for our bodies
      

        The right footwear can help keep your feet healthy, make your physical activity easier and help keep your body safe from injury 
      

        Some athletes and bodybuilders wrongly believe that taking synthetic growth hormone will help build up their muscles.
      

        A joint is the part of the body where two or more bones meet to allow movement.
      

        The skeleton and skeletal muscles work together to allow movement.
      

        There are about 600 muscles in the human body
      

        People who run regularly seem to be susceptible to Achilles tendonitis
      

        A child learning to walk receives important sensory information from the soles of their feet, and shoes can make walking more difficult.
      

        The right footwear can help keep your feet healthy, make your physical activity easier and help keep your body safe from injury 
      

        A ganglion cyst is the most common lump on the hand, and tends to target women between the ages of 20 and 40 years of age.
      

        Good foot care and regular check-ups can help people with diabetes avoid foot problems.
      

        Dupuytren's contracture gradually causes clawing of the fingers as they are pulled towards the palm.
      

        Correctly fitted shoes help you avoid foot and leg pain or injury.
      

        People who have chronic foot or leg problems that interfere with their health may be prescribed orthoses by their podiatrist.
      

        The heel protects the structures of the foot, but heel pain is a common foot complaint.
      

        Wearing shoes that fit properly and support your feet is vital to avoid sore feet and to prevent or alleviate many common foot problems.
      

        Raynaud's phenomenon can be a sign of a more serious underlying condition, so see your doctor if you experience it.
      

        Sever's disease is a common cause of heel pain, particularly in the young and physically active.
      

        Exercise can prevent age-related changes to muscles, bones and joints and can reverse these changes too.
      

        Most procedures that measure bone density are quick and pain-free.
      

        If you don’t have enough calcium in your diet, your bones will eventually become weak and brittle. 
      

        The right footwear can help keep your feet healthy, make your physical activity easier and help keep your body safe from injury 
      

        Bad habits such as slouching and inactivity cause muscle fatigue and tension that ultimately lead to poor posture.
      

        A balanced approach to sunlight exposure will help you get enough vitamin D while protecting against skin cancer.
      

        Ankle sprain is a common sports injuries caused by overstretching and tearing the supporting ligaments.
      

        Ankylosing spondylitis (AS) is a type of inflammatory arthritis that targets the joints of the spine.
      

        People can manage their arthritis using medication, physiotherapy, exercise and self management techniques.
      

        Baker's cysts of the knee don't always require active treatment and sometimes will only require observation by the treating doctor.
      

        Bursitis is often caused by overuse and the inflammation will continue unless the particular activity or movement is stopped.
      

        Carpal tunnel syndrome can be caused by repetitive hand movements, pregnancy and arthritis.
      

        Around 95 per cent of babies born with developmental dysplasia of the hip can be successfully treated.
      

        Elbow pain and can result from overuse in a range of sports or occupations.
      

        The hip joint is complicated to allow a wide range of motion while still supporting the weight of the body.
      

        Mild knee injuries may heal by themselves, but all injuries should be checked and diagnosed by a doctor or physiotherapist.
      

        Osgood-Schlatter syndrome is a painful knee condition that affects adolescents.
      

        Most children with Perthes' disease eventually recover, but it can take anywhere from two to five years.
      

        Reactive arthritis is a form of arthritis that occurs as a result of some bacterial infections.
      

        The majority of people with Bell's palsy, around 90 per cent, will recover completely with time.
      

        If you have a child with a disability you can help improve their communication and movement by encouraging them to take part in daily activities.
      

        Multiple sclerosis is not contagious, but it is progressive and unpredictable.
      

        A muscle cramp is an uncontrollable and painful spasm of a muscle.
      

        People affected by muscular dystrophy have different degrees of independence, mobility and carer needs.
      

        Myasthenia gravis is an autoimmune disease that causes muscle weakness.
      

        Polymyositis is hard to diagnose and may be mistaken for muscular dystrophy.
      

        A child with spinal muscular atrophy type 1 rarely lives beyond three years of age.
      

        It is important to get the correct treatment for a sprain or strain as soon as possible after the injury to help you recover quickly.
      

        Regular weight-bearing exercise and maintaining a diet rich in calcium from childhood will help reduce bone loss at menopause.
      

        A healthy, calcium-rich diet and regular physical activity throughout life can help prevent osteoporosis.
      

        Exercise can reduce the risk of fractures resulting from osteoporosis by both slowing the rate of bone loss, and reducing the person?s risk of falling by building muscle strength and improving balance.
      

        Osteoporosis in children is rare and usually caused by an underlying medical condition.
      

        Up to 25 per cent of all fractures that occur in people with osteoporosis and osteopenia, occur in men.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.
Viewing 1-10 of 96 results

      Moira and George talk about the difference palliative care has made to their quality of life.
    

      This 'Advance care plan' video clip offers first hand accounts from those who have completed their own Advance care plans.
    

      This 'Advance care plan' video clip offers first hand accounts from those who have completed their own Advance care plans.
    

      This 'Advance care plan' video clip offers first hand accounts from those who have completed their own Advance care plans.
    

      This 'Advance care plan' video clip offers first hand accounts from those who have completed their own Advance care plans.
    

      As Aimee’s husband was battling post traumatic stress and a conversion disorder, Aimee realised she also needed to talk to someone about how she was feeling.
    

      Family and friends of people with Alzheimer's disease discuss their experiences and how to recognise the early signs.
    

      Know that you are not alone, push through the anxiety of sharing to get help. Know it will shift and change, and that these feelings are not forever.
    

      Anxiety disorders are common, affecting about one in ten with persistent, excessive worrying that can hinder their ability to function. They may worry constantly about things that do not warrant it or that may never happen.
    

      In this video clip, participants discuss the various forms of treatment and support they have received from medical professionals as well as from other sources. Some of the strategies for managing anxiety are explored, including techniques such as physical activity, breathing exercises, and sticking to a routine.
    
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        How hospitals reduce the risk HIV, hepatitis B and C  - includes blood donation and transfusions, infection control and prevention for hospital workers, patients and visitors and where to get help.
      

        All about HIV and AIDS including HIV transmission, how HIV spreads, prevention, symptoms, treatment, testing, letting sexual partners know, reducing stigma and where to get help.
      

        All about women living with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), conceiving a baby, HIV status, pregnancy, HIV services, childbirth, baby feeding, babies with HIV, HIV prevention and treatment.
      

        People with HIV or hepatitis B or C participate in a wide range of sports without restrictions, and the risk of transmission to another player is extremely small.
      

        PEP (post-exposure prophylaxis) is antiviral medication to prevent HIV infection. Learn what is PEP, what PEP is for, where to get PEP, important reminders about PEP and where to get help. 
      

        Pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) is an oral medication to prevent HIV in people at risk. All about PrEP, what PrEP is for, dosage, where to get PrEP, PrEP side effects, PrEP health checks and support.
      

        Epididymitis is an infection causing inflammation of the epididymis. All about causes, symptoms, diagnosis, treatment, complications, chronic epididymitis and where to get help.
      

        Information about pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) an infection that affects the female reproductive system. Includes causes, symptoms, diagnosis, risks, treatment, prevention and where to get help. 
      

        Vaginal thrush is common. All about causes, symptoms, treatment, prevention and what to do if you keep getting vaginal yeast infections.
      

        Different methods of contraception available in Australia - includes LARC implants and IUDs, injections, contraceptive pills, condoms, diaphragm, vaginal ring, sterilisation, natural and withdrawal. 
      

        Information about female (internal) condoms - includes how to use condoms to reduce your risk of sexually transmissible infections (STIs) and pregnancy during sex, how they work and where to get them.
      

        Information about male (external) condoms - includes how to use condoms to reduce your risk of sexually transmissible infections (STIs) and pregnancy during sex, how they work and where to get them.
      

        Immunisation against hepatitis B reduces the risk of infection in babies.
      

        Information about human papillomavirus (HPV)  including symptoms, causes, prevention, sexual transmission, cervical screening and immunisation to protect against cervical and HPV-related cancers.
      

        Safe sex is sexual contact that doesn't involve the exchange of semen, vaginal fluids or blood between partners.
      

        Sexual and reproductive health hubs provide a range of sexual and reproductive health services for Victorian women, girls and gender diverse people.
      

        Sexual health month brings the community together to highlight the importance of getting regular sexual health checks, STI testing and preventing illness through safer sex.
      

        Bacterial vaginosis (BV) is caused by an imbalance of the bacteria normally present in the vagina. Includes causes, symptoms, transmission, treatments, prevention and where to get help.
      

        Chlamydia is called a 'silent infection' because many do not realise they have it. Includes causes, symptoms, risks, transmission, diagnosis, STI checks, treatment, prevention, notifying partners.
      

        Epididymitis is an infection causing inflammation of the epididymis. All about causes, symptoms, diagnosis, treatment, complications, chronic epididymitis and where to get help.
      

        Genital herpes is common and may not cause symptoms. More on causes, transmission, symptoms, reinfections, diagnosis, treatment, prevention, pregnancy and where to get support.
      

        Genital warts are a common sexually transmissible infection (STI). About causes, signs, symptoms, transmission, treatment, reinfection, prevention, HPV vaccines, cervical cancer screening and support.
      

        Gonorrhoea, also spelt gonorrhea, affects both men and women and is transmitted during sex, it may lead to infertility in women if left untreated.
      

        Hepatitis is an umbrella term for several diseases that affect the liver.
      

        Immunisation is the best protection against hepatitis A infection and it is recommended for people in high-risk groups.
      

        Hepatitis B is a viral infection that affects the liver and can lead to serious illness or death.
      

        In Australia, hepatitis C is most often spread through the sharing of drug injecting equipment. New all oral combination treatment has greatly improved health outcomes for people with hepatitis C.
      

        All about HIV and AIDS including HIV transmission, how HIV spreads, prevention, symptoms, treatment, testing, letting sexual partners know, reducing stigma and where to get help.
      

        Information about human papillomavirus (HPV)  including symptoms, causes, prevention, sexual transmission, cervical screening and immunisation to protect against cervical and HPV-related cancers.
      

        Molluscum contagiosum can be mistaken for genital warts or pimples, see your doctor for an accurate diagnosis. More on symptoms, rash, diagnosis, treatment, prevention and where to get help.
      

        Mpox (formerly known as monkeypox) is a disease caused by the monkeypox virus. It usually causes a mild illness with a rash. Most people recover within a few weeks.
      

        In Victoria, mpox vaccine is recommended for people at high risk of exposure to mpox. Search for your local mpox immunisation provider by Local Government Area (LGA).
      

        Pubic lice (crabs) spread through skin-to-skin contact and can cause small red areas, sores and itching.
      

        Salpingitis is one of the most common causes of female infertility and may permanently damage the fallopian tubes.
      

        If you have scabies, your sexual partners and household members need to be treated. More on symptoms, scabies rash, diagnosis, treatment, prevention and where to get help.
      

        Information about syphilis - includes who is at risk, symptoms, diagnosis, treatment and prevention. If left untreated, syphilis can cause serious health issues and congenital syphilis in babies.
      

        Trichomoniasis (or trichomonas) is a sexually transmissible infection (STI). Includes causes, symptoms, transmission, diagnosis, treatment, prevention, notifying partners and where to get help.
      

        Sexual health month brings the community together to highlight the importance of getting regular sexual health checks, STI testing and preventing illness through safer sex.
      

        Chlamydia is a sexually transmissible infection that is caused by the bacteria Chlamydia trachomatis.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.
Victoria's health system offers a vast range of services and support to Victorians across the state. Whether you are seeing a doctor, going to hospital for surgery or in need of emergency or crisis support, these pages outline the services that are available to you. They will also highlight the benefits of planning ahead and show you new ways to coordinate your healthcare.
Victoria's health system offers a vast range of services and support to Victorians across the state. Whether you are seeing a doctor, going to hospital for surgery or in need of emergency or crisis support, these pages outline the services that are available to you. They will also highlight the benefits of planning ahead and show you new ways to coordinate your healthcare.
When you need urgent healthcare now, but it's not life-threatening, and you can't wait to see your GP, help is available.
Mental Health and Wellbeing Connect is a new service dedicated to those who are supporting people living with mental health and substance use challenges.
There’s no right or wrong way or set timeline for how to grieve.
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        Cortisol helps to maintain blood pressure, immune function and the body's anti-inflammatory processes.
      

        Hormones can be thought of as chemical messages that communicate with the body and bring about changes.
      

        Your metabolism is influenced by your age, gender, muscle-to-fat ratio, the food you eat, physical activity and hormone function.
      

        The hormones leptin, insulin, oestrogens, androgens and growth hormone are factors in obesity.
      

        Acromegaly is caused by an excess of growth hormone in adults, which causes the overgrowth of bones in the face, hands, feet and internal organs.
      

        Some athletes and bodybuilders wrongly believe that taking synthetic growth hormone will help build up their muscles.
      

        Generally, pituitary tumours are benign and slow growing, and pituitary cancers are extremely rare.
      

        Cosmetic genital surgery involves reshaping the labia, vulva or penis to alter their size or shape.
      

        The pancreas helps to digest food, particularly protein.
      

        Pancreatitis is inflammation of the pancreas, which can be either acute or chronic
      

        The effects of androgen deficiency depend on how severe the deficiency is, its cause and the age at which the deficiency begins.
      

        It is the funeral directors job to help with many of the legal responsibilities, including the death certificate.
      

        Menopausal hormone therapy can reduce menopausal symptoms, but the benefits and risks need to be considered carefully.
      

        Information about pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) an infection that affects the female reproductive system. Includes causes, symptoms, diagnosis, risks, treatment, prevention and where to get help. 
      

        New life begins when a male sex cell (sperm) fertilises a female egg (ovum) within the female reproductive system.
      

        Symptoms of a goitre can include enlargement of the throat, swallowing problems and breathing problems.
      

        Good sources of iodine include fortified bread and any type of seafood, including seaweed.
      

        The parathyroid glands make hormones that regulate calcium, phosphorus and magnesium in the bones and blood.
      

        Hashimoto's disease progresses very slowly over many years, so the symptoms may go unnoticed.
      

        Hyperthyroidism can be diagnosed with a simple blood test that measures thyroid hormone levels.
      

        Hypothyroidism means the thyroid gland is underactive which causes the person?s metabolism to slow down.
      

        Anyone can develop thyroid cancer, regardless of age or gender.
      

        If the thyroid gland is overactive or sluggish, the metabolism will be affected, leading to a variety of symptoms.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.
To avoid food poisoning, follow these simple food safety rules when ordering in or dining out.
There are simple things we can all do now to build our resilience to the effects of climate change and help slow its pace.
Swimming can be enjoyed by people of all ages. It's a great low impact form of exercise that's good for our body and mind.
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        There are many people you can talk to who can help you overcome feelings of wanting to lash out.
      

        Many people use controlled breathing to help promote relaxation and reduce the effects of stress.
      

        It is normal to disagree with each other from time to time and occasional conflict is part of family life.
      

        Negative emotions can dampen our enthusiasm for life, depending on how long we let them affect us.
      

        Anxiety disorders are common mental health problems that affect many people.
      

        Worrying can be constructive if it helps you to work out possible solutions to a problem, but some people are troubled by excessive anxiety.
      

        Sadness is a feeling that everyone experiences. It is part of life. We can respond to our sadness in ways that help us feel better. 
      

        Stress affects people in different ways, but a balanced lifestyle can help you manage everyday stress.
      

        There are personal and relationship services available to you that offer counselling and relationship advice.
      

        Children and young people may find it difficult to open up about their problems. These tips can help you to find someone to talk to about your feelings and worries. 
      

        Talking with a doctor or healthcare professional about your mental health issues will help you to feel comfortable and get the most appropriate treatment for your needs.
      

        Building a strong, trusting relationship with your doctor can make it easier to talk with them about sensitive issues.
      

        Immediate telephone assistance is available for all kinds of emergencies.
      

        Bisexuality is when a person finds men and women physically, sexually or emotionally attractive.
      

        There is no real explanation as to why some men are gay and others are not; it is just part of the wide variety of human sexuality.
      

        Many women report they have lesbian experiences or feelings, but do not think of themselves as lesbians.
      

        Sexuality is not about whom we have sex with, or how often we have it. Sexuality is about our sexual feelings, thoughts, attractions and behaviours towards other people. We can find other people physically, sexually or emotionally attractive, and all those things are a part of our sexuality. 
      

        Sexuality is not about whom we have sex with, or how often we have it. Sexuality is about our sexual feelings, thoughts, attractions and behaviours towards other people. We can find other people physically, sexually or emotionally attractive, and all those things are a part of our sexuality. 
      

        Your gender is what feels natural to you, even if it is different from your biological sex. Some people may not feel comfortable with their biological sex but choose to live with the gender with which they were born. 
      

        This page explores both the gendered and biological aspects of women’s sexuality and sexual pleasure. 
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.
Viewing 1-10 of 2290 results

      1800RESPECT is a national sexual assault, domestic and family violence counselling service.
    

      Did you know deaths from injury and preventable diseases are more common for men than women in Australia? We’ve got some practical, expert advice to improve your chance of living a long, healthy life.
    

      During fetal development, the diaphragm or abdominal wall may fail to properly fuse, allowing the abdominal organs to protrude.
    

      The abdominal muscles support the trunk, allow movement and hold organs in place by regulating internal abdominal pressure.
    

      The type of pain felt in the abdomen can vary greatly.
    

      Children may feel stomach pain for a range of reasons and may need treatment.
    

      A 'tummy tuck', or abdominoplasty, is cosmetic surgery to remove fat and excess loose skin from the abdomen.
    

      Djirra's Aboriginal Family Violence Legal Service program helps Aboriginal people who are experiencing or recovering from family violence or sexual assault.
    

      The following services provide specialised healthcare for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in Victoria.
    

      Some abortion services in Victoria offer reduced fees to students, healthcare card holders and those experiencing financial difficulty.
    
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        A kilojoule is a unit of measure of energy, in the same way that kilometres measure distance. 
      

        A kilojoule is a unit of measure of energy, in the same way that kilometres measure distance. 
      

        The nutritional requirements of the human body change as we move through different life stages.
      

        It’s important for kids to eat a wide variety of foods for a healthy, well-balanced diet and to be physically active. Creating healthy habits during childhood helps to ensure lifelong healthy decisions and actions, and build healthy habits into the future.
      

        Crash dieting makes you gain more weight in the long run because it lowers your metabolism.
      

        There are no magical foods, or ways to combine foods, that melt away excess body fat.
      

        Overweight and obesity are essentially preventable diseases.
      

        The hormones leptin, insulin, oestrogens, androgens and growth hormone are factors in obesity.
      

        Always consult with your doctor before choosing any weight management service.
      

        Always consult with your doctor before choosing any weight management service.
      

        A kilojoule is a unit of measure of energy, in the same way that kilometres measure distance. 
      

        Body mass index or BMI is an approximate measure of your total body fat.
      

        Dietitians offer advice on food choices to help people improve their health and general wellbeing.
      

        A kilojoule is a unit of measure of energy, in the same way that kilometres measure distance. 
      

        The nutritional requirements of the human body change as we move through different life stages.
      

        It’s important for kids to eat a wide variety of foods for a healthy, well-balanced diet and to be physically active. Creating healthy habits during childhood helps to ensure lifelong healthy decisions and actions, and build healthy habits into the future.
      

        Your metabolism is influenced by your age, gender, muscle-to-fat ratio, the food you eat, physical activity and hormone function.
      

        Gaining lean body weight is a slow process that takes months and years, rather than days and weeks.
      

        The nutritional requirements of the human body change as we move through different life stages.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.
Yoga brings the body and mind together and is built on three main elements – movement, breathing and meditation. Yoga has many physical and mental health benefits including improved posture, flexibility, strength, balance and body awareness.
Always consult your doctor before embarking on any new fitness program, especially if you have a pre-existing medical condition or have not exercised in a long time.
Pilates and yoga are often thought to be one in the same, however Pilates traditionally focuses more on control of movement and muscular endurance as opposed to yoga which connects the body to the mind through flow of movement.
Yoga is an ancient Indian philosophy that dates back thousands of years. It was designed as a path to spiritual enlightenment, but in modern times, the physical aspects of yoga have found huge popularity as a gentle form of exercise and stress management. There are many different varieties of yoga, but each one essentially relies on structured poses (asanas) practiced with breath awareness.
Researchers have discovered that the regular practice of yoga may produce many health benefits, including increased cardiovascular fitness, improved muscular strength and normalisation of blood pressure. Yoga is a renowned antidote to stress and promotes improved sleeping patterns. Over time, those who practice yoga report lower levels of stress, and increased feelings of happiness and wellbeing. This is because concentrating on the postures and the breath acts as a form of meditation.
The classical techniques of yoga date back more than 5000 years. The practice of yoga encourages effort, intelligence, accuracy, thoroughness, commitment and dedication. The word yoga originates from the Sanskrit language and means ‘to join or yoke together’. It brings your body and mind together, and is built on three main elements – exercise, breathing and meditation.
The movements of yoga are designed to  challenge flexibility, balance, coordination and strength, increasing your body’s efficiency and overall health. Breathing techniques promote greater mind body connection, improving the  function of body and mind.
Focusing on controlled movement and breathing prepares the body and mind for meditation, with an approach to a quiet mind that allows silence and relief from everyday stress. When practiced regularly, yoga can become a powerful and sophisticated discipline for achieving physical, mental and emotional wellbeing.
There are many different varieties of yoga, each with a slightly different slant. The most popular are Hatha, Bikram, Iyengar, Yin and Vinyasa yoga.
Each yoga posture, or asana, is held for a period of time and linked with controlled breathing. Generally, a yoga session begins with gentle asanas and works up to more vigorous or challenging postures. A full yoga session should move every part of your body and should include pranayama (breath control practices), relaxation and meditation.
The different postures or asanas include:
The practice of yoga asanas develops strength and flexibility, while soothing your nerves and calming your mind. The asanas affect the muscles, joints and skin, and the whole body – glands, nerves, internal organs, bones, respiration and the brain. The physical building blocks of yoga are the posture and the breath.
Health benefits of yoga include:
Yoga is taught in classes, catering for beginners through to advanced participants. It is non-competitive and suitable for anyone, regardless of your age or fitness level. Your yoga teacher should carefully guide and observe you, and modify postures when necessary.
An asana should never cause pain. If you experience pain or discomfort, ease back on the stretch or don’t do it at all. It is important to keep within your physical limits.
If you are a male over 45 years of age or a female over 55 years of age, haven’t exercised for a long time or have a pre-existing medical condition, you should check with your preferred general practitioner or another suitably qualified professional before starting any new or regular exercise routine.
Pre-exercise  screeningExternal Link   is used to identify people with medical conditions or contraindications that may put them at a higher risk of experiencing an adverse event during physical activity. It is a tool to help decide if the potential benefits of exercise outweigh the risks for you and whether you should seek further guidance from an allied health or medical professional.
Yoga classes usually have 10 to 20 people, allowing for individual attention. Suggestions for getting the most out of your yoga class include:

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

Content on this website is provided for information purposes only. Information about a therapy, service, product or treatment does not in any way endorse or support such therapy, service, product or treatment and is not intended to replace advice from your doctor or other registered health professional. The information and materials contained on this website are not intended to constitute a comprehensive guide concerning all aspects of the therapy, product or treatment described on the website. All users are urged to always seek advice from a registered health care professional for diagnosis and answers to their medical questions and to ascertain whether the particular therapy, service, product or treatment described on the website is suitable in their circumstances. The State of Victoria and the Department of Health shall not bear any liability for reliance by any user on the materials contained on this website.

This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        The Victorian Child Protection Service provides child-centred, family-focused services to protect children and young people who are at risk of significant harm.
      

        Growing up is not easy and at each stage of development, from pre-primary right through to the teen years, there are challenges that will test a child’s emotional and mental health.
      

        Children’s Health and Wellbeing Locals provide health and wellbeing support for children aged zero to 11 and their families and carers.
      

        Too many children are physically, sexually and emotionally abused and when this happens, it is up to adults to speak up.
      

        Find advice for the circumstances under which you can complain, tips for making the complaint and to whom you can address your complaint.
      

        In times of family crisis it’s good to know there are emergency services only a phone call away.
      

        There are many government funded family support services available to help parents and young people deal with family issues.
      

        Perpetrators often make excuses for their violence, for example, blaming alcohol or stress.
      

        There are personal and relationship services available to you that offer counselling and relationship advice.
      

        Any person who believes, on reasonable grounds, that a child needs protection can notify Child Protection.
      

        Any act occurring within a relationship where there is an implication of trust, which results in harm to an older person.  Abuse may be physical, sexual, financial, psychological and/or neglect.
      

        Perpetrators often make excuses for their violence, for example, blaming alcohol or stress.
      

        People with a disability who experience violence, abuse or neglect can seek help from a range of services specifically designed to help them.
      

        There are personal and relationship services available to you that offer counselling and relationship advice.
      

        Too many children are physically, sexually and emotionally abused and when this happens, it is up to adults to speak up.
      

        Early childhood education and childcare options to choose from include preschool, education and care at a centre, family day care, occasional care, after-school care and private nannies.
      

        Certain children are at a higher risk of physical or emotional harm than others due to their living circumstances or home environment.
      

        There is a range of subsidised and free health services, including services for mental health and dental health, available for children in Victoria.
      

        Children’s Health and Wellbeing Locals provide health and wellbeing support for children aged zero to 11 and their families and carers.
      

        For children diagnosed with a disability, getting the support they need as early as possible will give them the best chance of minimising the long-term effects of the disability. 
      

        There are many government funded family support services available to help parents and young people deal with family issues.
      

        It is normal to disagree with each other from time to time and occasional conflict is part of family life.
      

        There are personal and relationship services available to you that offer counselling and relationship advice.
      

        Provides an overview of family support programs and health services available to refugees and asylum seekers living in Victoria.
      

        As a parent, you have an important role in helping your child recover from sexual abuse.
      

        Immunisations in Victoria are provided by local councils, GPs, nurses in medical clinics and community health services, maternal and child health nurses, travel clinics, pharmacists and hospitals.
      

        There are many subsidised and free medical, dental, mental, community health services available to support young people in Victoria.
      

        Children’s Health and Wellbeing Locals provide health and wellbeing support for children aged zero to 11 and their families and carers.
      

        Your local Maternal and Child Health (MCH) service will be a great source of support after your baby is born.
      

        Nurse-on-Call is a free, confidential telephone helpline that provides immediate, expert health advice from a registered nurse, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. 

      

        You may need outside help to resolve problems and ensure your relationship stays healthy and strong.
      

        Immunisations in Victoria are provided by local councils, GPs, nurses in medical clinics and community health services, maternal and child health nurses, travel clinics, pharmacists and hospitals.
      

        There are personal and relationship services available to you that offer counselling and relationship advice.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        Tell your healthcare professionals about all medicines you take, including complementary medicines.
      

        Medicinal cannabis is a legal, high quality medicine that can be prescribed for people by their doctor.
      

        People who are deciding whether to enter a clinical trial must understand all the essential facts, benefits and risks.
      

        Don't use online health information to self-diagnose - always see your doctor or healthcare professional.
      

        Medicinal cannabis is a legal, high quality medicine that can be prescribed for people by their doctor.
      

        Complementary medicines can interact with pharmaceutical medicines.
      

        Belief in a treatment may be enough to change the course of a person's physical illness.
      

        A Consumer Medicines Information (CMI) leaflet gives you accurate information about the safety of your medication and how best to take it.
      

        Tell your healthcare professionals about all medicines you take, including complementary medicines.
      

        Using products bought from online sites can be risky. Watch out for scams or quackery and don't self-diagnose or self-medicate. Always seek advice from your doctor.
      

        A Consumer Medicines Information (CMI) leaflet gives you accurate information about the safety of your medication and how best to take it.
      

        Make sure your doctor knows about every medicine you take, including vitamins.
      

        Complementary medicines can interact with pharmaceutical medicines.
      

        Most women take a drug of some kind during pregnancy, sometimes without realising the potential for harm.
      

        Antipsychotic medications work by altering brain chemistry to help reduce psychotic symptoms like hallucinations, delusions and disordered thinking
      

        Benzodiazepines (tranquillisers) are highly addictive and should only be used for certain conditions in a short-term or emergency situation.
      

        Chemotherapy is the use of drugs to destroy cancer cells.
      

        Antivirals are available for eligible people to treat COVID-19.
      

        Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medicines should always be used cautiously and for the shortest time possible.
      

        Medicinal cannabis is a legal, high quality medicine that can be prescribed for people by their doctor.
      

        Menopausal hormone therapy can reduce menopausal symptoms, but the benefits and risks need to be considered carefully.
      

        Antioxidants scavenge free radicals from the body's cells, and prevent or reduce the damage caused by oxidation.
      

        If you don’t have enough calcium in your diet, your bones will eventually become weak and brittle. 
      

        Using products bought from online sites can be risky. Watch out for scams or quackery and don't self-diagnose or self-medicate. Always seek advice from your doctor.
      

        Don't use online health information to self-diagnose - always see your doctor or healthcare professional.
      

        Vitamin and mineral supplements are frequently misused and taken without professional advice. Find out more about vitamin and mineral supplements and where to get advice.
      

        The 8 B-group vitamins are essential for various functions within the body.
      

        A balanced approach to sunlight exposure will help you get enough vitamin D while protecting against skin cancer.
      

        Vitamins and minerals are organic compounds that are required in very small amounts, for a variety of metabolic processes.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        A range of services are available to assist you with mental health difficulties. Getting help early can reduce the severity of mental illness symptoms and the impact on people’s daily lives.
      

        Forensic mental health services provide assessment and treatment of people with a mental illness and a history of criminal offending, or those who are at risk of offending.
      

        If you are a compulsory patient under the Mental Health Act, you have rights and there are people who can help you.
      

        The correct treatment for mental illness can help a person?s condition to improve or help a person to live well, despite the presence of some ongoing symptoms.
      

        Mental health issues and illnesses may impact on a person’s thoughts, perceptions, feelings and behaviours. Most people can manage their condition with medication, counselling or both.
      

        A range of services are available to assist you with mental health difficulties. Getting help early can reduce the severity of mental illness symptoms and the impact on people’s daily lives.
      

        The grief felt by family and friends can be deeper when the cause of death is suicide.
      

        Mental health first aid is the help you give to someone developing a mental health problem, experiencing a worsening of a mental health problem or in a mental health crisis. 
      

        In Australia, suicide is the leading cause of death for people aged between 15 and 44. We can all play a role in preventing suicide by looking out for possible warning signs and reaching out.
      

        Some mental health conditions are associated with an increased risk of suicide. Protective factors can reduce suicide risk, such as mental health care, counselling and social support.
      

        All suicide threats are serious. You don't have to be a trained professional to help a person contemplating suicide.
      

        Antipsychotic medications work by altering brain chemistry to help reduce psychotic symptoms like hallucinations, delusions and disordered thinking
      

        Cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) can help you change unhelpful or unhealthy habits of thinking, feeling and behaving.
      

        Anyone who is struggling with a personal concern can seek help from a counsellor.
      

        A range of services are available to assist you with mental health difficulties. Getting help early can reduce the severity of mental illness symptoms and the impact on people’s daily lives.
      

        You have the potential to be a great support to your family member if they are diagnosed with an eating disorder.
      

        Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) can be an effective treatment for some types of mental illness.
      

        You can do a lot to help your friend or relative with a mental illness, but you need to look after yourself too.
      

        Mental health first aid is the help you give to someone developing a mental health problem, experiencing a worsening of a mental health problem or in a mental health crisis. 
      

        A case manager or key clinician looks after your interests while you are a client of public (government) mental health services.
      

        A mental health treatment plan explains the support provided by each member of a person's healthcare team.
      

        People with a mental illness who are receiving effective treatment are no more violent than anyone else in the community.
      

        Psychoanalysis is a treatment based on the theory that our present is shaped by our past.
      

        Having friends and other social connections is good for your health and wellbeing.
      

        A common misconception is that anorexia nervosa only affects young women, but it affects all genders of all ages.
      

        Anxiety disorders are common mental health problems that affect many people.
      

        Binge eating disorder (BED) is a serious mental health condition and the most common eating disorder in Australia. You can recover from binge eating disorder with the right help.
      

        Bipolar disorder is a type of psychosis, which means the person?s perception of reality is altered. It is characterised by extreme mood swings
      

        People with body dysmorphic disorder constantly worry about the way they look.
      

        People with borderline personality disorder may exhibit extreme behaviour, such as repeated self-mutilation or taking overdoses of medication.
      

        Understanding the warning signs of bulimia nervosa and seeking help as soon as possible will help your recovery.
      

        The most important thing is to recognise the signs and symptoms and seek support.
      

        Dissociation is a mental process where a person disconnects from their thoughts, feelings, memories or sense of identity.
      

        Eating disorders are a mental illness and can affect people of all gender, ages, cultures and body sizes.
      

        Eating disorders are on the increase in children and young people. Identifying the signs and seeking early treatment is the best way to begin the journey to recovery.
      

        Did you know that your mental health can affect your heart health and vice versa? Depression can affect how well people with heart disease recover, and increase their risk of further heart problems.
      

        Munchausen syndrome is a mental disorder in which the patient fakes illness to gain attention and sympathy.
      

        Obsessive compulsive disorder can have a profound effect on a person's life.
      

        OSFED stands for ‘other specified feeding or eating disorders’ and is one of the most common eating disorders in Australia.
      

        Without treatment, frequent and prolonged panic attacks can be severely disabling.
      

        Paranoia is the irrational and persistent feeling that people are ‘out to get you’ or that you are the subject of persistent, intrusive attention by others. 
      

        People with post-traumatic stress disorder often experience feelings of panic or extreme fear, which may resemble what was felt during the traumatic event.
      

        In psychosis, the everyday thoughts that enable us to lead our daily lives become confused.
      

        Diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder may be difficult because the symptoms are similar to bipolar disorder and schizophrenia.
      

        People with schizophrenia do not have 'split personalities' and they are not intellectually disabled.
      

        Dual diagnosis means someone has both a mental illness and a substance use problem.
      

        Mental health issues and illnesses may impact on a person’s thoughts, perceptions, feelings and behaviours. Most people can manage their condition with medication, counselling or both.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        Good sexual and reproductive health is central to women's ability to make choices and decisions about their lives, including when, or whether, to consider having children.
      

        Sexual health month brings the community together to highlight the importance of getting regular sexual health checks, STI testing and preventing illness through safer sex.
      

        Different methods of contraception available in Australia - includes LARC implants and IUDs, injections, contraceptive pills, condoms, diaphragm, vaginal ring, sterilisation, natural and withdrawal. 
      

        The diaphragm is a non-hormonal barrier form of contraception. Includes information on how they work, effectiveness, use, advantages, possible risks and side effects, where to get them and support.
      

        It is best to take emergency contraception as soon as possible, ideally within 24 hours of having unprotected sex, but it still works well within 96 hours (4 days).
      

        Information about female (internal) condoms - includes how to use condoms to reduce your risk of sexually transmissible infections (STIs) and pregnancy during sex, how they work and where to get them.
      

        Hormonal contraception is available as implants that slowly release hormones into the body over time.
      

        Hormonal contraception is available as injections that slowly release hormones into the body over time.
      

        Contraceptive injections to stop sperm production are not yet available in Australia, but studies suggest that they may provide a safe, effective and reversible method of contraception in the future.
      

        Information about intrauterine devices (IUDs - copper and hormonal) as long acting reversible contraception (LARC) to prevent pregnancy. Includes possible side effects and risks, costs and support.
      

        Information about male (external) condoms - includes how to use condoms to reduce your risk of sexually transmissible infections (STIs) and pregnancy during sex, how they work and where to get them.
      

        The 2 types of oral contraception available in Australia are the combined pill, known as 'the pill', and the progestogen only (mini) pill.
      

        Sterilisation is a permanent method of contraception.
      

        The vaginal ring works in a similar way to the combined oral contraceptive pill to prevent pregnancy.
      

        Having a vasectomy does not affect a person's ability to produce sex hormones, enjoy sex or reach orgasm.
      

        The 2 types of oral contraception available in Australia are the combined pill, known as 'the pill', and the progestogen only pill.
      

        You can become fertile again very soon after a surgical or medical abortion, so it's important to start using contraception immediately if you wish to prevent any unwanted pregnancies.
      

        After having a baby, you need to choose an effective method of contraception if you don't want to have another baby straight away. 
      

        This page shows you where to  find translated information about the different methods of contraception (how to prevent getting pregnant) available in Australia
      

        Information about unplanned pregnancy including pregnancy options (such as medical and surgical abortion, adoption, foster and kinship care), pregnancy counselling and where to get help.
      

        This list includes some key Victorian and national services and phonelines providing health and sexual and reproductive health information and or health care.
      

        Good sexual and reproductive health is central to women's ability to make choices and decisions about their lives, including when, or whether, to consider having children.
      

        Sexual and reproductive health hubs provide a range of sexual and reproductive health services for Victorian women, girls and gender diverse people.
      

        Sexual health month brings the community together to highlight the importance of getting regular sexual health checks, STI testing and preventing illness through safer sex.
      

        Bacterial vaginosis (BV) is caused by an imbalance of the bacteria normally present in the vagina. Includes causes, symptoms, transmission, treatments, prevention and where to get help.
      

        A brain injury can change the way a person experiences and expresses their sexuality.
      

        Chlamydia is called a 'silent infection' because many do not realise they have it. Includes causes, symptoms, risks, transmission, diagnosis, STI checks, treatment, prevention, notifying partners.
      

        People with cognitive disability can express their sexuality in satisfying ways.
      

        Men with diabetes are more prone to problems with erectile dysfunction or impotence.
      

        Sexuality is a key part of human nature. Expressing sexuality in satisfying ways is important for everyone, including people with a disability. Some people with disability may need additional support, education or services to enjoy healthy sexuality and relationships.
      

        All about HIV and AIDS including HIV transmission, how HIV spreads, prevention, symptoms, treatment, testing, letting sexual partners know, reducing stigma and where to get help.
      

        All about women living with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), conceiving a baby, HIV status, pregnancy, HIV services, childbirth, baby feeding, babies with HIV, HIV prevention and treatment.
      

        Chlamydia is a sexually transmissible infection that is caused by the bacteria Chlamydia trachomatis.
      

        Communication is the best remedy for all types of relationship problems, including sexual problems caused by Parkinson?s disease.
      

        Information about pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) an infection that affects the female reproductive system. Includes causes, symptoms, diagnosis, risks, treatment, prevention and where to get help. 
      

        PEP (post-exposure prophylaxis) is antiviral medication to prevent HIV infection. Learn what is PEP, what PEP is for, where to get PEP, important reminders about PEP and where to get help. 
      

        Pre-exposure prophylaxis (PrEP) is an oral medication to prevent HIV in people at risk. All about PrEP, what PrEP is for, dosage, where to get PrEP, PrEP side effects, PrEP health checks and support.
      

        If you have scabies, your sexual partners and household members need to be treated. More on symptoms, scabies rash, diagnosis, treatment, prevention and where to get help.
      

        Sexuality is a key part of human nature. Expressing sexuality in satisfying ways is important for everyone, including people with a disability. Some people with disability may need additional support, education or services to enjoy healthy sexuality and relationships.
      

        Information about syphilis - includes who is at risk, symptoms, diagnosis, treatment and prevention. If left untreated, syphilis can cause serious health issues and congenital syphilis in babies.
      

        Trichomoniasis (or trichomonas) is a sexually transmissible infection (STI). Includes causes, symptoms, transmission, diagnosis, treatment, prevention, notifying partners and where to get help.
      

        Vaginal thrush is common. All about causes, symptoms, treatment, prevention and what to do if you keep getting vaginal yeast infections.
      

        This list includes some key Victorian and national services and phonelines providing health and sexual and reproductive health information and or health care.
      

        Find out some facts about women's sexual and reproductive health - including fertility, contraception, menopause, parental consent and conditions (such as PCOS and endometriosis).
      

        Sexual and reproductive health hubs provide a range of sexual and reproductive health services for Victorian women, girls and gender diverse people.
      

        Different methods of contraception available in Australia - includes LARC implants and IUDs, injections, contraceptive pills, condoms, diaphragm, vaginal ring, sterilisation, natural and withdrawal. 
      

        How parents and carers can talk to children about relationships, sex and sexuality. Includes - how and when to start, topics at different ages and stages, teenage sex, school safety and support. 
      

        All people, including those with cognitive disabilities, have the right to explore and express their sexuality in appropriate ways.
      

        This list includes some key Victorian and national services and phonelines providing health and sexual and reproductive health information and or health care.
      

        Find out some facts about women's sexual and reproductive health - including fertility, contraception, menopause, parental consent and conditions (such as PCOS and endometriosis).
      

        Sexual and reproductive health hubs provide a range of sexual and reproductive health services for Victorian women, girls and gender diverse people.
      

        People with a disability who experience violence, abuse or neglect can seek help from a range of services specifically designed to help them.
      

        Information about unplanned pregnancy including pregnancy options (such as medical and surgical abortion, adoption, foster and kinship care), pregnancy counselling and where to get help.
      

        Too many children are physically, sexually and emotionally abused and when this happens, it is up to adults to speak up.
      

        If you suspect sexual abuse or have been told about it by a child, you must report it.
      

        As a parent, you have an important role in helping your child recover from sexual abuse.
      

        Sexual assault is any unwanted sexual behaviour or activity that makes the victim feel uncomfortable, frightened or threatened.
      

        Sexual and reproductive health hubs provide a range of sexual and reproductive health services for Victorian women, girls and gender diverse people.
      

        Different methods of contraception available in Australia - includes LARC implants and IUDs, injections, contraceptive pills, condoms, diaphragm, vaginal ring, sterilisation, natural and withdrawal. 
      

        It is best to take emergency contraception as soon as possible, ideally within 24 hours of having unprotected sex, but it still works well within 96 hours (4 days).
      

        Information about female (internal) condoms - includes how to use condoms to reduce your risk of sexually transmissible infections (STIs) and pregnancy during sex, how they work and where to get them.
      

        Information about male (external) condoms - includes how to use condoms to reduce your risk of sexually transmissible infections (STIs) and pregnancy during sex, how they work and where to get them.
      

        This page shows you where to  find translated information about the different methods of contraception (how to prevent getting pregnant) available in Australia
      

        Masturbation is a normal and healthy way for people to explore their own bodies. More on - what it is masturbation, frequency, benefits, myths, facts, tips for parents and support.
      

        Chlamydia is a sexually transmissible infection that is caused by the bacteria Chlamydia trachomatis.
      

        Oral sex is using your mouth, lips or tongue to stimulate your partner’s genitals or anus. Includes consent, risks, STIs, reducing risk, avoiding oral sex and where to get help.
      

        Safe sex is sexual contact that doesn't involve the exchange of semen, vaginal fluids or blood between partners.
      

        It is normal to have mixed feelings about having sex with someone else.
      

        Good sexual and reproductive health is central to women's ability to make choices and decisions about their lives, including when, or whether, to consider having children.
      

        Find out some facts about women's sexual and reproductive health - including fertility, contraception, menopause, parental consent and conditions (such as PCOS and endometriosis).
      

        Sexual and reproductive health hubs provide a range of sexual and reproductive health services for Victorian women, girls and gender diverse people.
      

        Sexual health month brings the community together to highlight the importance of getting regular sexual health checks, STI testing and preventing illness through safer sex.
      

        Chlamydia is called a 'silent infection' because many do not realise they have it. Includes causes, symptoms, risks, transmission, diagnosis, STI checks, treatment, prevention, notifying partners.
      

        People with cognitive disability can express their sexuality in satisfying ways.
      

        Sexuality is a key part of human nature. Expressing sexuality in satisfying ways is important for everyone, including people with a disability. Some people with disability may need additional support, education or services to enjoy healthy sexuality and relationships.
      

        Menopause, the final menstrual period, is a natural event that marks the end of a woman's reproductive years.
      

        Adjusting to the many changes that happen around puberty can be difficult for both parents and young people.
      

        Sexuality is a key part of human nature. Expressing sexuality in satisfying ways is important for everyone, including people with a disability. Some people with disability may need additional support, education or services to enjoy healthy sexuality and relationships.
      

        This list includes some key Victorian and national services and phonelines providing health and sexual and reproductive health information and or health care.
      

        Good sexual and reproductive health is central to women's ability to make choices and decisions about their lives, including when, or whether, to consider having children.
      

        Sexual and reproductive health hubs provide a range of sexual and reproductive health services for Victorian women, girls and gender diverse people.
      

        Bacterial vaginosis (BV) is caused by an imbalance of the bacteria normally present in the vagina. Includes causes, symptoms, transmission, treatments, prevention and where to get help.
      

        Chlamydia is called a 'silent infection' because many do not realise they have it. Includes causes, symptoms, risks, transmission, diagnosis, STI checks, treatment, prevention, notifying partners.
      

        Common causes of erectile dysfunction include physical illness, anxiety and too much alcohol.
      

        Physical illness or relationship problems can cause a loss of sex drive or libido.
      

        Premature ejaculation is the most common sexual problem in in the world.
      

        Information about syphilis - includes who is at risk, symptoms, diagnosis, treatment and prevention. If left untreated, syphilis can cause serious health issues and congenital syphilis in babies.
      

        Trichomoniasis (or trichomonas) is a sexually transmissible infection (STI). Includes causes, symptoms, transmission, diagnosis, treatment, prevention, notifying partners and where to get help.
      

        Sexual and reproductive health hubs provide a range of sexual and reproductive health services for Victorian women, girls and gender diverse people.
      

        Partying is fun but being out of it on alcohol or drugs can put you at risk of unwanted or unsafe sex
      

        Every year, Year 12 students head to schoolies (leavers) to celebrate the end of school life. Includes alcohol and drug safety, tips, how to prepare, what to pack and what to do in an emergency.
      

        Safe sex is sexual contact that doesn't involve the exchange of semen, vaginal fluids or blood between partners.
      

        There are many services available to support sex workers in Victoria, including peer services.
      

        It is normal to have mixed feelings about having sex with someone else.
      

        Good sexual and reproductive health is central to women's ability to make choices and decisions about their lives, including when, or whether, to consider having children.
      

        Find out some facts about women's sexual and reproductive health - including fertility, contraception, menopause, parental consent and conditions (such as PCOS and endometriosis).
      

        Sexual and reproductive health hubs provide a range of sexual and reproductive health services for Victorian women, girls and gender diverse people.
      

        Sexual health month brings the community together to highlight the importance of getting regular sexual health checks, STI testing and preventing illness through safer sex.
      

        Bisexuality is when a person finds men and women physically, sexually or emotionally attractive.
      

        There is no real explanation as to why some men are gay and others are not; it is just part of the wide variety of human sexuality.
      

        Many women report they have lesbian experiences or feelings, but do not think of themselves as lesbians.
      

        Sexuality is not about whom we have sex with, or how often we have it. Sexuality is about our sexual feelings, thoughts, attractions and behaviours towards other people. We can find other people physically, sexually or emotionally attractive, and all those things are a part of our sexuality. 
      

        Sexuality is not about whom we have sex with, or how often we have it. Sexuality is about our sexual feelings, thoughts, attractions and behaviours towards other people. We can find other people physically, sexually or emotionally attractive, and all those things are a part of our sexuality. 
      

        Switchboard Victoria (Inc.) is a community-based not for profit organisation that provides a peer-based, volunteer driven support service for LGBTIQA+ people and their friends, families and allies.
      

        How parents and carers can talk to children about relationships, sex and sexuality. Includes - how and when to start, topics at different ages and stages, teenage sex, school safety and support. 
      

        Your gender is what feels natural to you, even if it is different from your biological sex. Some people may not feel comfortable with their biological sex but choose to live with the gender with which they were born. 
      

        This page explores both the gendered and biological aspects of women’s sexuality and sexual pleasure. 
      

        Sexual and reproductive health hubs provide a range of sexual and reproductive health services for Victorian women, girls and gender diverse people.
      

        Sexual health month brings the community together to highlight the importance of getting regular sexual health checks, STI testing and preventing illness through safer sex.
      

        Some abortion services in Victoria offer reduced fees to students, healthcare card holders and those experiencing financial difficulty.
      

        In Victoria, you can have two types of abortion: surgical and medication. Both types are safe and reliable. You can have a medication abortion up to nine weeks of pregnancy. You can have a surgical abortion from around six weeks of pregnancy onwards.
      

        Information about medication abortion (also known as medical abortion or the 'abortion pill') - includes how medication works, appointments, what to expect, side effects, possible risks, self-care.
      

        Abortion is one of the most common and safest types of surgery in Australia.
      

        You can become fertile again very soon after a surgical or medical abortion, so it's important to start using contraception immediately if you wish to prevent any unwanted pregnancies.
      

        In Victoria, where abortion is available in a range of public and private settings, it is a safe, common and legal reproductive health choice.
      

        Information about unplanned pregnancy including pregnancy options (such as medical and surgical abortion, adoption, foster and kinship care), pregnancy counselling and where to get help.
      

        Good sexual and reproductive health is central to women's ability to make choices and decisions about their lives, including when, or whether, to consider having children.
      

        Sexual and reproductive health hubs provide a range of sexual and reproductive health services for Victorian women, girls and gender diverse people.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.
Your heart is a vital organ. It is a muscle that pumps blood to all parts of your body. The blood pumped by your heart provides your body with the oxygen and nutrients it needs to function.
Your heart is about the size of a clenched fist, and weighs between 300 and 450 g. It lies in the middle of your chest, behind and slightly to the left of your breastbone. 
If you are of average body weight and size, your body contains about five litres of blood, all of which passes through your heart every minute or so. When necessary, such as during exercise, your heart can pump up to four times that amount per minute.
Your heart has a right and left side separated by a wall called the septum. On each side of the wall, there is a small collecting chamber called an ‘atrium’, which leads into a large pumping chamber called a ‘ventricle’. There are four chambers: the left atrium and right atrium (upper chambers), and the left ventricle and right ventricle (lower chambers).
The right side of your heart collects blood on its return from the rest of your body. The blood entering the right side of your heart is low in oxygen. Your heart pumps the blood from the right side of your heart to your lungs so it can receive more oxygen. 
Once it has received oxygen, the blood returns directly to the left side of your heart, which then pumps it out again to all parts of your body through an artery called the aorta. 
Blood pressure refers to the amount of force the pumping blood exerts on arterial walls.
Each atrium is connected to its ventricle by a one-way valve. The valve on the right side of the heart is called the tricuspid valve, while the valve on the left side is called the mitral valve. 
The familiar 'lub-dub' sound of the heartbeat is caused by the rhythmic closing of the heart valves as blood is pumped in and out of the chambers. 
The heart rate is regulated by a special cluster of cells in the right atrium, called the sinus node. The sinus node  prompts the upper chambers to contract first. Then, an electrical impulse is sent to a second cluster of cells (the atrioventricular node), which is found between the upper and lower chambers of the heart. The electrical impulse causes the lower chambers to contract. At rest, your heart beats approximately 60 to 100 times a minute.
The blood vessels of the heart include:
There are many different types of heart conditions. Some common heart conditions include:
‘Heart disease’ is a broad term for different conditions affecting the heart. 
Different heart conditions can have different symptoms. 
It’s important to be aware of the following symptoms, which can be a warning sign of a medical emergency, including a heart attack:
If your symptoms last more than 10 minutes, are severe or getting worse, call triple zero (000) immediately for an ambulance. 

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

        Stopping episodes of recurrent ARF can prevent rheumatic heart disease (RHD).
      

        A person with amyloidosis produces aggregates of insoluble protein that cannot be eliminated from the body.
      

        When a person is anaemic, the red blood cells have to work harder to get oxygen around the body.
      

        An aneurysm may have no symptoms until it is either very large or it ruptures.
      

        Aortic stenosis may be congenital (present from before birth), but is often diagnosed during teenage years.
      

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

Content on this website is provided for information purposes only. Information about a therapy, service, product or treatment does not in any way endorse or support such therapy, service, product or treatment and is not intended to replace advice from your doctor or other registered health professional. The information and materials contained on this website are not intended to constitute a comprehensive guide concerning all aspects of the therapy, product or treatment described on the website. All users are urged to always seek advice from a registered health care professional for diagnosis and answers to their medical questions and to ascertain whether the particular therapy, service, product or treatment described on the website is suitable in their circumstances. The State of Victoria and the Department of Health shall not bear any liability for reliance by any user on the materials contained on this website.

This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        People can manage their arthritis using medication, physiotherapy, exercise and self management techniques.
      

        Pain is our built-in alarm system. It makes us aware that something might be going wrong in our body. However, there are many things you can do to deal effectively with persistent pain.
      

        Pain is our built-in alarm system. It makes us aware that something might be going wrong in our body. However, there are many things you can do to deal effectively with persistent pain.
      

        Living with persistent pain isn’t easy. Your doctor can help you balance your pain, your treatment and hurdles you encounter in life.
      

        No special diet or 'miracle food' can cure arthritis, but some conditions may be helped by avoiding or including certain foods.
      

        Exercise can reduce some of the symptoms of arthritis, and improve joint mobility and strength.
      

        Pain is our built-in alarm system. It makes us aware that something might be going wrong in our body. However, there are many things you can do to deal effectively with persistent pain.
      

        People of all ages and fitness levels can practice tai chi and may gain health benefits.
      

        People can manage their arthritis using medication, physiotherapy, exercise and self management techniques.
      

        Knee replacement surgery removes a diseased knee joint and replaces it with an artificial joint.
      

        Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medicines should always be used cautiously and for the shortest time possible.
      

        Always see your doctor if you have ongoing pain to find the best pain-management option for you.
      

        Pain is our built-in alarm system. It makes us aware that something might be going wrong in our body. However, there are many things you can do to deal effectively with persistent pain.
      

        Ankylosing spondylitis (AS) is a type of inflammatory arthritis that targets the joints of the spine.
      

        One child in every 1,000 in Australia is diagnosed with juvenile arthritis. It is one of the most common chronic conditions to affect children.
      

        People can manage their arthritis using medication, physiotherapy, exercise and self management techniques.
      

        Fibromyalgia is a condition associated with widespread pain and tenderness.
      

        While most other types of arthritis develop slowly, an attack of gout happens suddenly, often overnight.
      

        Many people will experience symptoms of osteoarthritis as they age.
      

        Typical symptoms of polymyalgia rheumatica include severe muscle aches and stiffness, particularly in the neck, shoulders and thighs.
      

        Reactive arthritis is a form of arthritis that occurs as a result of some bacterial infections.
      

        Early treatment of rheumatoid arthritis is important in  helping you manage the condition more effectively.
      

        People can manage their arthritis using medication, physiotherapy, exercise and self management techniques.
      

        Most people can resume normal activities around three weeks after an arthroscopy.
      

        Back pain is common. Some people will develop back pain that is persistent (lasts more than three months). There are many things that you can do to live well with back pain. 
      

        A chronic or long term illness means the person has to adjust to the demands of the illness and the therapy used to treat the condition.
      

        Elbow pain and can result from overuse in a range of sports or occupations.
      

        The hip joint is complicated to allow a wide range of motion while still supporting the weight of the body.
      

        A joint is the part of the body where two or more bones meet to allow movement.
      

        Treatments like physiotherapy, osteopathy or remedial massage can generally help neck and shoulder pain.
      

        Shoulder pain is common in our community. The good news is that with appropriate treatment pain will improve so you can get back to doing the things you enjoy.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        The National Bowel Cancer Screening Program (NBCSP) offers kits for free to Australians between the ages of 50 and 74 years of age.
      

        Information on breast screening - who is eligible for free breast screens and when, and how to arrange a mammogram (breast screen) in Victoria.
      

        The aim of cancer screening is to find cancer in its early stages.
      

        Cervical cancer can be prevented through regular screening (every 5 years). Cervical cancer screening is recommended for women or people with a cervix (25 to 74 years) who have been sexually active.
      

        An endoscope or fibrescope is a long, usually flexible tube with a lens at one end and a video camera at the other.
      

        A predisposition to certain cancers can be inherited via altered genes.
      

        Prostate cancer can be treated in a variety of ways, so discuss treatment options with your doctor.
      

        Pathology tests cover blood tests, and tests on urine, stools (faeces) and bodily tissues
      

        Regular eye tests or check-ups detect problems early, so you can have early treatment to minimise any permanent damage to your eyes.
      

        Men should see their doctor for regular medical check-ups.
      

        A woman at high risk of a particular disease should be checked more frequently and/or at an earlier age.
      

        A ringing sensation in the ears (tinnitus), or people complaining that you talk too loudly are signs you may need to have your hearing checked.
      

        Barium tests are used to examine conditions of the digestive tract such as reflux, narrowing or ulceration.
      

        Most procedures that measure bone density are quick and pain-free.
      

        Being prepared for a bushfire helps you cope better in an emergency.
      

        A coronary angiogram is the most accurate diagnostic test for a range of heart problems, including coronary heart disease.
      

        The CT scan is a medical imaging procedure that uses x-rays and digital computer technology to create detailed images of the body.
      

        A doctor may recommend an electrocardiogram for patients who may be at risk of heart disease because of family history, smoking, overweight, diabetes or other conditions.
      

        An endoscope or fibrescope is a long, usually flexible tube with a lens at one end and a video camera at the other.
      

        The MRI scan is a medical imaging procedure that uses a magnetic field and radio waves to take pictures inside the body.
      

        PET scans are tests that show how an organ or tissue is working.
      

        Talking to children openly in a way that suits their age, while also involving them in decisions regarding bushfire preparation and response, will help them feel emotionally secure and confident. 
      

        Ultrasound is a scan used to study internal body structures.
      

        An x-ray examination uses a special machine to take two-dimensional pictures of internal body structures to help diagnose conditions or injuries.
      

        Before a biopsy, you need to discuss a range of issues with your doctor or surgeon.
      

        Pathology tests cover blood tests, and tests on urine, stools (faeces) and bodily tissues
      

        The full blood count (FBC) test looks for abnormalities in the blood, such as unusually high or low numbers of blood cells.
      

        You can freeze your eggs for medical reasons or for reasons that are more to do with your life circumstances.
      

        Non-surgical procedures are used to diagnose, measure or treat problems such as disease or injury
      

        Every newborn baby in Australia is offered a test for the rare medical conditions of phenylketonuria, hypothyroidism, cystic fibrosis and congenital adrenal hyperplasia. 
      

        Maternal serum screening can indicate increased risk of abnormalities in the unborn child, but is not a diagnosis.
      

        How to get a test for COVID-19 in Victoria.
      

        Gestational diabetes is diabetes that occurs during pregnancy and usually disappears when the pregnancy is over.
      

        You can freeze your eggs for medical reasons or for reasons that are more to do with your life circumstances.
      

        Every newborn baby in Australia is offered a test for the rare medical conditions of phenylketonuria, hypothyroidism, cystic fibrosis and congenital adrenal hyperplasia. 
      

        A range of tests and scans are available to pregnant women to confirm pregnancy and monitor the baby's development in the womb.
      

        Sometimes, a home pregnancy test may be positive when a woman isn’t pregnant.
      

        Maternal serum screening can indicate increased risk of abnormalities in the unborn child, but is not a diagnosis.
      

        Ultrasound is used during pregnancy to check the baby's development and to help pick up any abnormalities.
      

        Chorionic villus sampling (CVS) is a pregnancy test that checks the baby for some abnormalities.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        Body mass index or BMI is an approximate measure of your total body fat.
      

        The aim of cancer screening is to find cancer in its early stages.
      

        Men should see their doctor for regular medical check-ups.
      

        A woman at high risk of a particular disease should be checked more frequently and/or at an earlier age.
      

        Regular health checks can help you identify any early signs of health issues.
      

        Children should have an oral health check by the time they turn two.
      

        Men should see their doctor for regular medical check-ups.
      

        A woman at high risk of a particular disease should be checked more frequently and/or at an earlier age.
      

        Every newborn baby in Australia is offered a test for the rare medical conditions of phenylketonuria, hypothyroidism, cystic fibrosis and congenital adrenal hyperplasia. 
      

        You can dramatically reduce your risk of early death by making a few simple lifestyle changes.
      

        Allergy testing is used to find which substances provoke an allergic reaction.
      

        The National Bowel Cancer Screening Program (NBCSP) offers kits for free to Australians between the ages of 50 and 74 years of age.
      

        Information on breast screening - who is eligible for free breast screens and when, and how to arrange a mammogram (breast screen) in Victoria.
      

        Cervical cancer can be prevented through regular screening (every 5 years). Cervical cancer screening is recommended for women or people with a cervix (25 to 74 years) who have been sexually active.
      

        A doctor may recommend an electrocardiogram for patients who may be at risk of heart disease because of family history, smoking, overweight, diabetes or other conditions.
      

        Regular eye tests or check-ups detect problems early, so you can have early treatment to minimise any permanent damage to your eyes.
      

        A predisposition to certain cancers can be inherited via altered genes.
      

        A ringing sensation in the ears (tinnitus), or people complaining that you talk too loudly are signs you may need to have your hearing checked.
      

        Healthy eating and lifestyle changes can help to manage high blood pressure.
      

        Body mass index or BMI is an approximate measure of your total body fat.
      

        The National Bowel Cancer Screening Program (NBCSP) offers kits for free to Australians between the ages of 50 and 74 years of age.
      

        Women should become familiar with the normal look, feel and shape of their breasts, so they will notice any abnormal changes.
      

        The aim of cancer screening is to find cancer in its early stages.
      

        Cervical cancer can be prevented through regular screening (every 5 years). Cervical cancer screening is recommended for women or people with a cervix (25 to 74 years) who have been sexually active.
      

        A chronic or long term illness means the person has to adjust to the demands of the illness and the therapy used to treat the condition.
      

        Regular eye tests or check-ups detect problems early, so you can have early treatment to minimise any permanent damage to your eyes.
      

        A ringing sensation in the ears (tinnitus), or people complaining that you talk too loudly are signs you may need to have your hearing checked.
      

        As part of a Heart Health Check, your doctor will calculate your cardiovascular disease risk score. Your risk score estimates your risk of having a heart attack or stroke in the next 5 years.  
      

        Risk factors for heart disease include smoking, diabetes, obesity, family history and age.
      

        Everyone's immunisation needs are different and are influenced by your health, lifestyle, age and occupation.
      

        Get the most out of your consultation by preparing for your health or medical appointment. 
      

        You can dramatically reduce your risk of early death by making a few simple lifestyle changes.
      

        Regular health checks can help you identify any early signs of health issues.
      

        Everyone can reduce their risk of having a stroke by making a few simple lifestyle changes.
      

        To get the most out of the conversation with your doctor, nurse or other healthcare provider, it is best to be open about providing information and to speak up if you don?t understand.
      

        Men with an increased risk of testicular cancer should regularly examine their testicles for unusual lumps or swellings.
      

        As part of a Heart Health Check, your doctor will calculate your cardiovascular disease risk score. Your risk score estimates your risk of having a heart attack or stroke in the next 5 years.  
      

        You can manage your health by learning about healthy living, taking steps to prevent disease and having regular health checks with your doctor.
      

        To get the most out of the conversation with your doctor, nurse or other healthcare provider, it is best to be open about providing information and to speak up if you don?t understand.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        Well-managed anger can be a useful emotion that motivates you to make positive changes.
      

        There are many people you can talk to who can help you overcome feelings of wanting to lash out.
      

        Untreated behavioural disorders in children may mean they grow up to be dysfunctional adults.
      

        Children with untreated conduct disorder (CD) are at increased risk of problems including substance use, personality disorders and mental illnesses.
      

        It is normal to disagree with each other from time to time and occasional conflict is part of family life.
      

        Oppositional defiant disorder is a childhood behavioural problem characterised by constant disobedience and hostility.
      

        With the physical and emotional closeness of a partnership, it is inevitable that there is sometimes conflict.
      

        Certain children are at a higher risk of physical or emotional harm than others due to their living circumstances or home environment.
      

        There is a range of non-government agencies available to help families under stress in caring for their children.
      

        People with a disability who experience violence, abuse or neglect can seek help from a range of services specifically designed to help them.
      

        When you, your partner or someone in your family has a mental illness, it can cause stress and worry for everyone.
      

        The following services provide specialised healthcare for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in Victoria.
      

        Children and young people are not to blame for violence at home, it's not your fault and it's not a special secret
      

        Children exposed to domestic violence are more likely to experience emotional and behavioural problems.
      

        Perpetrators often make excuses for their violence, for example, blaming alcohol or stress.
      

        Victoria has a range of services available to help people at risk of, experiencing or escaping from family violence.
      

        People with a mental illness who are receiving effective treatment are no more violent than anyone else in the community.
      

        People with a disability who experience violence, abuse or neglect can seek help from a range of services specifically designed to help them.
      

        Family violence can be physical, sexual, psychological, emotional, economic, spiritual or legal abuse. All family violence is illegal and unacceptable.
      

        The following services provide specialised healthcare for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in Victoria.
      

        Victoria has a range of services available to help people at risk of, experiencing or escaping from family violence.
      

        There is a range of non-government agencies available to help families under stress in caring for their children.
      

        Family violence can be physical, sexual, psychological, emotional, economic, spiritual or legal abuse. All family violence is illegal and unacceptable.
      

        Immediate telephone assistance is available for all kinds of emergencies.
      

        Date rape can be especially common among young people who have had little sexual experience and aren’t sure that what they have experienced crosses the line into rape. Many victims of date rape can feel pressure not to report the crime, or feel embarrassed or responsible for the attack.
      

        People with a disability who experience violence, abuse or neglect can seek help from a range of services specifically designed to help them.
      

        Too many children are physically, sexually and emotionally abused and when this happens, it is up to adults to speak up.
      

        If you suspect sexual abuse or have been told about it by a child, you must report it.
      

        As a parent, you have an important role in helping your child recover from sexual abuse.
      

        Sexual assault is any unwanted sexual behaviour or activity that makes the victim feel uncomfortable, frightened or threatened.
      

        Cognitive behaviour therapy (CBT) can help you change unhelpful or unhealthy habits of thinking, feeling and behaving.
      

        Children and young people are not to blame for violence at home, it's not your fault and it's not a special secret
      

        Babies and toddlers can be as affected by trauma as any other family member.
      

        Preschoolers may not have the words but will show their distress at traumatic events through changes in behaviour and functioning.
      

        Tell your child the facts about a distressing or frightening experience using language they can understand.
      

        When a family is affected by trauma, everyone will react in a different way.
      

        Children look to their parents or carers to judge how to deal with a crisis.
      

        Teenagers may turn to friends rather than parents for support in times of trauma and distress.
      

        A teenager may be deeply upset by a traumatic event, but not share their feelings with their parents.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.
Yoga brings the body and mind together and is built on three main elements – movement, breathing and meditation. Yoga has many physical and mental health benefits including improved posture, flexibility, strength, balance and body awareness.
Always consult your doctor before embarking on any new fitness program, especially if you have a pre-existing medical condition or have not exercised in a long time.
Pilates and yoga are often thought to be one in the same, however Pilates traditionally focuses more on control of movement and muscular endurance as opposed to yoga which connects the body to the mind through flow of movement.
Yoga is an ancient Indian philosophy that dates back thousands of years. It was designed as a path to spiritual enlightenment, but in modern times, the physical aspects of yoga have found huge popularity as a gentle form of exercise and stress management. There are many different varieties of yoga, but each one essentially relies on structured poses (asanas) practiced with breath awareness.
Researchers have discovered that the regular practice of yoga may produce many health benefits, including increased cardiovascular fitness, improved muscular strength and normalisation of blood pressure. Yoga is a renowned antidote to stress and promotes improved sleeping patterns. Over time, those who practice yoga report lower levels of stress, and increased feelings of happiness and wellbeing. This is because concentrating on the postures and the breath acts as a form of meditation.
The classical techniques of yoga date back more than 5000 years. The practice of yoga encourages effort, intelligence, accuracy, thoroughness, commitment and dedication. The word yoga originates from the Sanskrit language and means ‘to join or yoke together’. It brings your body and mind together, and is built on three main elements – exercise, breathing and meditation.
The movements of yoga are designed to  challenge flexibility, balance, coordination and strength, increasing your body’s efficiency and overall health. Breathing techniques promote greater mind body connection, improving the  function of body and mind.
Focusing on controlled movement and breathing prepares the body and mind for meditation, with an approach to a quiet mind that allows silence and relief from everyday stress. When practiced regularly, yoga can become a powerful and sophisticated discipline for achieving physical, mental and emotional wellbeing.
There are many different varieties of yoga, each with a slightly different slant. The most popular are Hatha, Bikram, Iyengar, Yin and Vinyasa yoga.
Each yoga posture, or asana, is held for a period of time and linked with controlled breathing. Generally, a yoga session begins with gentle asanas and works up to more vigorous or challenging postures. A full yoga session should move every part of your body and should include pranayama (breath control practices), relaxation and meditation.
The different postures or asanas include:
The practice of yoga asanas develops strength and flexibility, while soothing your nerves and calming your mind. The asanas affect the muscles, joints and skin, and the whole body – glands, nerves, internal organs, bones, respiration and the brain. The physical building blocks of yoga are the posture and the breath.
Health benefits of yoga include:
Yoga is taught in classes, catering for beginners through to advanced participants. It is non-competitive and suitable for anyone, regardless of your age or fitness level. Your yoga teacher should carefully guide and observe you, and modify postures when necessary.
An asana should never cause pain. If you experience pain or discomfort, ease back on the stretch or don’t do it at all. It is important to keep within your physical limits.
If you are a male over 45 years of age or a female over 55 years of age, haven’t exercised for a long time or have a pre-existing medical condition, you should check with your preferred general practitioner or another suitably qualified professional before starting any new or regular exercise routine.
Pre-exercise  screeningExternal Link   is used to identify people with medical conditions or contraindications that may put them at a higher risk of experiencing an adverse event during physical activity. It is a tool to help decide if the potential benefits of exercise outweigh the risks for you and whether you should seek further guidance from an allied health or medical professional.
Yoga classes usually have 10 to 20 people, allowing for individual attention. Suggestions for getting the most out of your yoga class include:

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

Content on this website is provided for information purposes only. Information about a therapy, service, product or treatment does not in any way endorse or support such therapy, service, product or treatment and is not intended to replace advice from your doctor or other registered health professional. The information and materials contained on this website are not intended to constitute a comprehensive guide concerning all aspects of the therapy, product or treatment described on the website. All users are urged to always seek advice from a registered health care professional for diagnosis and answers to their medical questions and to ascertain whether the particular therapy, service, product or treatment described on the website is suitable in their circumstances. The State of Victoria and the Department of Health shall not bear any liability for reliance by any user on the materials contained on this website.

This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.
Viewing 1-10 of 2290 results

      1800RESPECT is a national sexual assault, domestic and family violence counselling service.
    

      Did you know deaths from injury and preventable diseases are more common for men than women in Australia? We’ve got some practical, expert advice to improve your chance of living a long, healthy life.
    

      During fetal development, the diaphragm or abdominal wall may fail to properly fuse, allowing the abdominal organs to protrude.
    

      The abdominal muscles support the trunk, allow movement and hold organs in place by regulating internal abdominal pressure.
    

      The type of pain felt in the abdomen can vary greatly.
    

      Children may feel stomach pain for a range of reasons and may need treatment.
    

      A 'tummy tuck', or abdominoplasty, is cosmetic surgery to remove fat and excess loose skin from the abdomen.
    

      Djirra's Aboriginal Family Violence Legal Service program helps Aboriginal people who are experiencing or recovering from family violence or sexual assault.
    

      The following services provide specialised healthcare for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in Victoria.
    

      Some abortion services in Victoria offer reduced fees to students, healthcare card holders and those experiencing financial difficulty.
    
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        Respect, consideration, recognition and support are some of the principles that guide how government departments, local councils and government-funded services work with carers and people who are being cared for.
      

        There are laws that set out how healthcare professionals can collect and store your health information and when they are allowed to share it.
      

        Informed consent means that a person understands their condition and any proposed medical treatment and carers can help with the decision-making process.
      

        If you are unhappy with the way a disability service has treated you, you have the right to complain and to have your concerns addressed.
      

        Carers have the right to make a complaint on behalf of a person in their care to a healthcare professional, service or regulatory body.
      

        Carer roles can change, for example, from part-time to full-time care and back as a person’s care needs change.
      

        You and your carers should expect clear communication about medical issues and treatment options and costs in hospital in a way that you can understand.
      

        More than 700,000 Victorians are a personal carer for a family member or friend who is older with care needs, has a disability or has a mental health or other chronic health condition. 
      

        The term ‘carer’ can refer to paid and unpaid, professional and ‘lay’ carers.  
      

        Even though you are caring for someone else, it is important that you remember to take care of yourself.
      

        Care in culturally and linguistically diverse communities may be supported by extended family networks.
      

        Being a carer for someone with a mental illness can be emotionally and physically demanding, but it can also be a rewarding experience.
      

        Foster care is temporary care of children up to 18 years by trained, assessed and accredited foster carers.
      

        As a foster carer, you are providing a safe, supportive home for a child or young person who can’t live with their family of origin. You may face challenges that other parents don’t have to confront.
      

        Even though you are caring for someone else, it is important that you remember to take care of yourself.
      

        As circumstances change, it is important to continually assess what services and home assistance will be most helpful.
      

        Sexuality is a key part of human nature. Expressing sexuality in satisfying ways is important for everyone, including people with a disability. Some people with disability may need additional support, education or services to enjoy healthy sexuality and relationships.
      

        Carers often organise appointments and treatments for the person they are caring for and help with medicines. 
      

        When caring for a loved one with a terminal illness, it is important to look after your own mental health and wellbeing so that you will have the energy and strength required for your role as carer.
      

        Sexuality is a key part of human nature. Expressing sexuality in satisfying ways is important for everyone, including people with a disability. Some people with disability may need additional support, education or services to enjoy healthy sexuality and relationships.
      

         Ask a doctor and research health information when making a health decision. This will include the cost, timing and regularity of medical treatment.
      

        You can appoint someone to be your medical power of attorney, also known as ‘enduring power of attorney (medical treatment)’, to make medical decisions on your behalf when, in certain circumstances, you can’t.
      

        There will be times during your care role when you will need to adjust your role as the circumstances of both you and the person you care for change.
      

        Whether you are receiving care at home or living in a residential aged care home, you have the right to be treated with respect and dignity at all times, and receive high-quality care and support. 
      

        Community services offer information, advice, practical support, financial help or a combination of services.
      

        Mental Health and Wellbeing Connect is a new service dedicated to those who are supporting people living with mental health and substance use challenges or psychological distress.
      

        Nurse-on-Call is a free, confidential telephone helpline that provides immediate, expert health advice from a registered nurse, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. 

      

        Care in culturally and linguistically diverse communities may be supported by extended family networks.
      

        Sexuality is a key part of human nature. Expressing sexuality in satisfying ways is important for everyone, including people with a disability. Some people with disability may need additional support, education or services to enjoy healthy sexuality and relationships.
      

        Any act occurring within a relationship where there is an implication of trust, which results in harm to an older person.  Abuse may be physical, sexual, financial, psychological and/or neglect.
      

        An emergency care plan is a set of instructions about caring for someone in the event that you are not able to.
      

        Look after your emotional needs so you can continue your care role, be healthy and well and enjoy life as much as possible.
      

        The Australian and Victorian Governments offer carer support services to people who provide care to someone with a disability, mental illness, medical condition or older person with care needs.
      

        If you are a carer, for example of a person with a disability or mental illness, or recovering from an accident or illness or an older person with care needs, you need to look after yourself or the demands may wear you down.
      

        Mental Health and Wellbeing Connect is a new service dedicated to those who are supporting people living with mental health and substance use challenges or psychological distress.
      

        Sexuality is a key part of human nature. Expressing sexuality in satisfying ways is important for everyone, including people with a disability. Some people with disability may need additional support, education or services to enjoy healthy sexuality and relationships.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        Learn all about alcohol - includes standard drink size, health risks and effects, how to keep track of your drinking, binge drinking, how long it takes to leave the body, tips to lower intake. 
      

        Amphetamines are stimulant drugs that speed up messages between the brain and body.
      

        Prolonged misuse of steroids can cause liver damage and severe mood swings.
      

        Benzodiazepines (tranquillisers) are highly addictive and should only be used for certain conditions in a short-term or emergency situation.
      

        Caffeine is a stimulant that acts on the brain and nervous system.
      

        Cannabis has many harmful effects on health.
      

        Cocaine is a highly addictive illegal stimulant that has serious side effects.
      

        GHB is a party drug that produces feelings of euphoria, confidence, relaxation and sociability. GHB is highly addictive and even a small increase in dose can cause serious effects or death.
      

        Heroin is a depressant of the central nervous system, which means it slows down brain function and particularly the control of breathing.
      

        The drug ice, is a stimulant with a high risk of addiction if it used regularly. 
      

        Inhalants are chemical substances that give off fumes that can be breathed in to achieve a 'high'.
      

        It is dangerous to take kava in combination with alcohol or other psychoactive drugs.
      

        MDMA (ecstasy) is an illegal stimulant and hallucinogenic drug that can cause stroke and heart attack.
      

        Psychedelics also known as Hallucinogens target specific centres of the brain to alter its understanding of sensory input.
      

        Synthetic drugs aim to mimic the effects of existing illicit drugs such as cannabis, cocaine and ecstasy.
      

        Most people know when they are feeling ‘in a mood’. But do you know what ‘mood’ means? Or where your mood comes from? Or how to change your mood? Understanding your moods may help you work out what causes them and how you tend to behave when you are in different moods. 
      

        Dual diagnosis means someone has both a mental illness and a substance use problem.
      

        The following services provide specialised healthcare for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in Victoria.
      

        Asking for help when you first suspect you have an alcohol or drug problem is important. If you think you have an addiction, speak to your local doctor or phone DirectLine.
      

        Counsellors, doctors and other healthcare professionals can help if you have a problem with alcohol or other drugs (AOD).
      

        If you are worried about your alcohol or drug use or, call DirectLine on 1800 888 236 for counselling, information and referral, or speak with your local doctor.
      

        Alcohol, medications, illegal drugs and some herbal remedies can all cause damage if an overdose is taken.
      

        Medication treatments for heroin dependence include methadone, buprenorphine and naltrexone.
      

        Talking with your doctor or healthcare professional is an important step in getting care for issues of drug or alcohol addiction or dependence. 
      

        Learn all about alcohol - includes standard drink size, health risks and effects, how to keep track of your drinking, binge drinking, how long it takes to leave the body, tips to lower intake. 
      

        Alcohol, medications, illegal drugs and some herbal remedies can all cause damage if an overdose is taken.
      

        Drugs affect your body’s central nervous system. They affect how you think, feel and behave. 
      

        Most women take a drug of some kind during pregnancy, sometimes without realising the potential for harm.
      

        Dual diagnosis means someone has both a mental illness and a substance use problem.
      

        Many drugs, both prescription and illegal, can cause tooth damage.
      

        Many drugs, both prescription and illegal, can cause tooth damage.
      

        Surveys provide information about drug use and the characteristics of people who use drugs in Victoria and Australia.
      

        Teenagers use drugs for similar reasons that adults do.
      

        Most women take a drug of some kind during pregnancy, sometimes without realising the potential for harm.
      

        Asking for help when you first suspect you have an alcohol or drug problem is important. If you think you have an addiction, speak to your local doctor or phone DirectLine.
      

        Learn all about alcohol - includes standard drink size, health risks and effects, how to keep track of your drinking, binge drinking, how long it takes to leave the body, tips to lower intake. 
      

        Alcohol, medications, illegal drugs and some herbal remedies can all cause damage if an overdose is taken.
      

        Research shows that people who exercise regularly have better mental health and emotional wellbeing, and lower rates of mental illness. 
      

        Partying can be fun, but you need to be aware of the risks, which can include accidents, robbery, violence and sexual assault.
      

        Every year, Year 12 students head to schoolies (leavers) to celebrate the end of school life. Includes alcohol and drug safety, tips, how to prepare, what to pack and what to do in an emergency.
      

        All children are eventually exposed to drugs ‒ prescription medication, alcohol and tobacco, and sometimes illegal drugs too ‒ or to messages about drugs.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.
Viewing 1-10 of 96 results

      Moira and George talk about the difference palliative care has made to their quality of life.
    

      This 'Advance care plan' video clip offers first hand accounts from those who have completed their own Advance care plans.
    

      This 'Advance care plan' video clip offers first hand accounts from those who have completed their own Advance care plans.
    

      This 'Advance care plan' video clip offers first hand accounts from those who have completed their own Advance care plans.
    

      This 'Advance care plan' video clip offers first hand accounts from those who have completed their own Advance care plans.
    

      As Aimee’s husband was battling post traumatic stress and a conversion disorder, Aimee realised she also needed to talk to someone about how she was feeling.
    

      Family and friends of people with Alzheimer's disease discuss their experiences and how to recognise the early signs.
    

      Know that you are not alone, push through the anxiety of sharing to get help. Know it will shift and change, and that these feelings are not forever.
    

      Anxiety disorders are common, affecting about one in ten with persistent, excessive worrying that can hinder their ability to function. They may worry constantly about things that do not warrant it or that may never happen.
    

      In this video clip, participants discuss the various forms of treatment and support they have received from medical professionals as well as from other sources. Some of the strategies for managing anxiety are explored, including techniques such as physical activity, breathing exercises, and sticking to a routine.
    
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        If in doubt about the cause of your chest pain, call an ambulance.
      

        With a heart attack every minute counts. The warning signs of a heart attack can be varied and may not always be sudden or severe. Find out more from cardiologist Professor Ian Meredith.
      

        Healthy eating and lifestyle changes can help to manage high blood pressure.
      

        If in doubt about the cause of your chest pain, call an ambulance.
      

        The heart, blood and blood vessels work together to service the cells of the body.
      

        Heart attack is an emergency. If you have warning signs of heart attack, get help fast. Call triple zero (000) and ask for an ambulance.
      

        Although blocked blood vessels can cause both coronary heart disease and some types of stroke, stroke is not the same as heart disease.
      

        The heart is about the size of a clenched fist and lies in the middle of your chest, behind and slightly to the left of your breastbone.
      

        Stopping episodes of recurrent ARF can prevent rheumatic heart disease (RHD).
      

        Aortic stenosis may be congenital (present from before birth), but is often diagnosed during teenage years.
      

        If in doubt about the cause of your chest pain, call an ambulance.
      

        Some congenital heart defects are mild and cause no significant disturbance to the way the heart functions.
      

        A heart that beats irregularly, too fast or too slow, is experiencing an arrhythmia.
      

        Heart attack is an emergency. If you have warning signs of heart attack, get help fast. Call triple zero (000) and ask for an ambulance.
      

        This video explains some common heart procedures and provides questions to ask your doctor to ensure you understand what has happened to your heart.
      

        Angina attacks can be prompted by exertion or physical exercise, when the hard-working heart muscle requires greater amounts of oxygen.
      

        Atrial fibrillation (AF) is a type of arrhythmia, which means that the heart beats fast and abnormally.
      

        Endocarditis is an infection of the heart valves or the inner lining of the heart.
      

        An enlarged heart isn?t a condition in itself, but a symptom of an underlying problem that is causing the heart to work harder than normal.
      

        Although blocked blood vessels can cause both coronary heart disease and some types of stroke, stroke is not the same as heart disease.
      

        Some children acquire a heart problem after an illness in childhood, and this is called an acquired heart defect.
      

        Heart failure is a condition where the heart muscle doesn’t pump blood to the rest of the body as well as it should. 
      

        Heart disease affects both women and men. Cardiologist Cathie Coleman from St Vincent's Hospital explains the risk factors for heart disease and what actions you can take to lower your risks.
      

        Many children have innocent heart murmurs that don?t require any treatment, but medical tests are often needed to check.
      

        You should be investigated for long QT syndrome if you faint for no apparent reason, during or after exercise or emotional excitement.
      

        Metabolic syndrome is a collection of conditions that can increase your risk of diabetes, stroke and heart disease.
      

        Noonan syndrome is a genetic condition that usually includes heart abnormalities and characteristic facial features.
      

        Pericarditis symptoms may be similar to those of heart attack and include chest pain and abnormal heart rhythms.
      

        Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome is characterised by attacks of rapid heart rate or tachycardia.
      

        Hypertension, or high blood pressure, can increase your risk of heart attack, kidney failure and stroke.
      

        CPR is a life-saving skill that everyone should learn from an accredited organisation.
      

        A coronary angiogram is the most accurate diagnostic test for a range of heart problems, including coronary heart disease.
      

        A doctor may recommend an electrocardiogram for patients who may be at risk of heart disease because of family history, smoking, overweight, diabetes or other conditions.
      

        After heart bypass surgery, eat a wide variety of fresh fruit and vegetables, wholegrain cereals and cold-water fish.
      

        People with coronary heart disease talk about the medical procedures that followed their heart attack and diagnosis.
      

        A person with an artificial cardiac pacemaker can live a normal life and can still perform moderate to strenuous activities.
      

        Transplantation varies depending on the transplant organ or tissue so speak with your medical team about surgical procedures, recovery and medications.
      

        Replacing foods that contain saturated fats with foods that contain polyunsaturated and monounsaturated fats will help to lower your cholesterol.
      

        A diet low in saturated fats and high in fibre and plant food can substantially reduce your risk of developing heart disease.
      

        Learn the three steps you can take to improve your heart health today.
      

        Did you know that your mental health can affect your heart health and vice versa? Depression can affect how well people with heart disease recover, and increase their risk of further heart problems.
      

        You can dramatically reduce your risk of early death by making a few simple lifestyle changes.
      

        Walking will improve your fitness and reduce your risk of heart disease.
      

        Hypertension, or high blood pressure, can increase your risk of heart attack, kidney failure and stroke.
      

        Your body needs cholesterol, but it can make its own. You don't need cholesterol in your diet.
      

        The risk of most diabetes-related complications can be reduced.
      

        As part of a Heart Health Check, your doctor will calculate your cardiovascular disease risk score. Your risk score estimates your risk of having a heart attack or stroke in the next 5 years.  
      

        Over 700,000 Australian's are currently living with coronary heart disease.  There are  actions you can take to help prevent heart disease and to manage your life after a heart attack.
      

        Risk factors for heart disease include smoking, diabetes, obesity, family history and age.
      

        Did you know that your mental health can affect your heart health and vice versa? Depression can affect how well people with heart disease recover, and increase their risk of further heart problems.
      

        Heart disease affects both women and men. Cardiologist Cathie Coleman from St Vincent's Hospital explains the risk factors for heart disease and what actions you can take to lower your risks.
      

        Overweight and obesity are essentially preventable diseases.
      

        A smoker's excess risk of heart attack reduces rapidly after only one year of not smoking.
      

        This video explains some common heart procedures and provides questions to ask your doctor to ensure you understand what has happened to your heart.
      

        Over 700,000 Australian's are currently living with coronary heart disease.  There are  actions you can take to help prevent heart disease and to manage your life after a heart attack.
      

        Attending cardiac rehabilitation will help you to create a good foundation for living with your heart condition.
      

        Make sure you follow your plan when you leave hospital, take your medication and keep your appointments with doctors.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.
Victoria's health system offers a vast range of services and support to Victorians across the state. Whether you are seeing a doctor, going to hospital for surgery or in need of emergency or crisis support, these pages outline the services that are available to you. They will also highlight the benefits of planning ahead and show you new ways to coordinate your healthcare.
Victoria's health system offers a vast range of services and support to Victorians across the state. Whether you are seeing a doctor, going to hospital for surgery or in need of emergency or crisis support, these pages outline the services that are available to you. They will also highlight the benefits of planning ahead and show you new ways to coordinate your healthcare.
When you need urgent healthcare now, but it's not life-threatening, and you can't wait to see your GP, help is available.
Mental Health and Wellbeing Connect is a new service dedicated to those who are supporting people living with mental health and substance use challenges.
There’s no right or wrong way or set timeline for how to grieve.
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        If you are unfamiliar with what is involved, starting an exercise program can be challenging.
      

        Pick an exercise or fitness activity that appeals to you and suits your lifestyle.
      

        When you're trying to become more physically active, set realistic health and fitness goals.
      

        It’s important for your health that you get enough physical activity every day, and that you limit your sedentary behaviour. But getting the amount of physical activity you need doesn’t have to be hard or unpleasant.
      

        Aerobics injuries are usually caused by trauma and overuse, but can be prevented by using the right techniques and equipment.
      

        Australian rules football is a physical contact sport that often results in injuries from tackling, kicking, running  and constant competition for the ball.
      

        Basketball is a sport enjoyed by people of all ages and abilities.
      

        Basketball is a fast game with frequent and aggressive body contacts - injuries can and do occur.
      

        Canoeing and kayaking can be done as a hobby, a competitive sport or as a fun activity on holidays.
      

        Careful preparation and the right equipment can help prevent canoeing and kayaking injuries.
      

        To play cricket you need to be fit and strong and have good hand-eye coordination and ball-handling skills.
      

        Cricket is a very popular sport. Injuries are often caused by overuse, being struck by a cricket ball and falls.
      

        Cycling can help to protect you from serious diseases.
      

        You are much more likely to hurt yourself by falling off your bike or hitting a stationary object than colliding with another vehicle.
      

        Dancing can be a fun way to stay fit for people of all ages and abilities.
      

        Dancing is fun and a great form of exercise, but make sure you avoid injuries.
      

        If you are planning to buy a dog, make sure you choose a breed that's appropriate to your lifestyle.
      

        Training too hard or fast is a common cause of sports-related injuries.
      

        Never go fishing alone ? always fish with someone else and, ideally, with two other people.
      

        Golf provides a stimulating challenge, combined with a healthy walk in pleasant surroundings.
      

        The average golfer playing an 18-hole game walks about seven kilometres.
      

        Learn what to do if you find yourself in a rip current.
      

        Lawn bowls is a popular participant sport, particularly for the elderly, due to its relaxed pace and comparatively light physical demands.
      

        People who take part in lawn bowls develop skills and coordination that improve their fitness.
      

        The risk of injury from martial arts is low compared to other contact sports.
      

        A mouthguard provides the best protection for the teeth, lips and jaw during sport and leisure activities.
      

        Orienteering organisations remove hazards where possible or clearly signpost them and warn all participants.
      

        Pick an exercise or fitness activity that appeals to you and suits your lifestyle.
      

        When starting a program of resistance training, follow the advice of a qualified professional to avoid injury.
      

        Rowing builds physical skills of stamina, strength, balance, timing and technique.
      

        People of all ages and abilities can get involved in rugby codes through clinics and modified rules games.
      

        A high proportion of injuries associated with rugby occur during the tackle.
      

        Running helps build strong bones, strengthens muscles and helps maintain a healthy weight.
      

        Warm up before running and do lots of slow and sustained stretches as part of your cool-down routine.
      

        Pay attention to basic safety precautions to reduce your risk of injury from winter sports.
      

        Soccer is great for your health and can be played in competition or in the park with friends.
      

        Common causes of injuries to soccer players are player contact, falls and tackles.
      

        A sports injury may be more severe than you think.
      

        Squash can be a fast-moving, sport that provides an excellent cardiovascular workout.
      

        Eye protection is recommended to prevent eye injuries.
      

        Take surfing lessons to learn the correct technique and get started safely.
      

        The main cause of injury when surfing is contact with a surfer?s own board or that of another surfer.
      

        Swimming is fun, and a great way to keep fit and make friends.
      

        It only takes seconds for a child to drown, so never take your eyes off children near the water.
      

        People of all ages enjoy tennis for its physical, social and psychological benefits.
      

        Common tennis injuries include injuries to the ankle, knee and wrist.
      

        It’s important for your health that you get enough physical activity every day, and that you limit your sedentary behaviour. But getting the amount of physical activity you need doesn’t have to be hard or unpleasant.
      

        Ask your coach for help to improve your touch football technique - it will reduce your risk of injury.
      

        Water polo is a demanding game as players have to tread water or swim for the whole match.
      

        You need balance and stamina for windsurfing.
      

        You need to drink enough and regularly to keep hydrated during exercise. 
      

        If you are unfamiliar with what is involved, starting an exercise program can be challenging.
      

        Exercise is important for your physical and mental health. Working out with a friend means you’re more likely to have fun and stick to your exercise plan.
      

        Gardening is an enjoyable form of exercise, but you need to take care.
      

        Reach out to the world around you for fun, a sense of achievement, social contact and mental stimulation.
      

        Choosing the right fitness centre or service provider requires some research
      

        Even if you’re busy, you still need to find a way to be physically active. 
      

        There are many excuses we can come up with to avoid being active, but the truth is there is always a way to fit some physical activity into your day.
      

        Pick an exercise or fitness activity that appeals to you and suits your lifestyle.
      

        You are more likely to keep up a healthy lifestyle change if your chosen activity suits you.
      

        If you haven’t exercised for a while, see your doctor or registered exercise professional.
      

        When you're trying to become more physically active, set realistic health and fitness goals.
      

        Many men are only motivated to become more active after they have a health scare.
      

        Physical activity can help older people maintain independence, recover from illness and reduce their risk of disease.
      

        If you can't make the time to exercise for yourself, do it for your family.
      

        The majority of Australians adults do not meet the recommended physical activity guidelines to gain the health benefits of increased fitness and reduced body fat.
      

        It’s important for your health that you get enough physical activity every day, and that you limit your sedentary behaviour. But getting the amount of physical activity you need doesn’t have to be hard or unpleasant.
      

        The less sitting or lying down you do during the day, the better your chances for living a healthy life.
      

        Walking is an excellent form of exercise for people of all ages and abilities.
      

        Exercise can reduce some of the symptoms of arthritis, and improve joint mobility and strength.
      

        Asthma triggered by exercise can be prevented with medication and by preparing for exercise and physical activity.
      

        A little physical activity and some breathing exercises can help people with lung disease.
      

        People with cancer should be as physically active as their abilities and condition allow.
      

        Adopting a 'brain healthy' lifestyle may reduce your risk of dementia in later life.
      

        Many parents worry when their child with diabetes starts or returns to school.
      

        Many people living with epilepsy are successfully employed across a range of professional fields.
      

        It is rare for a person with epilepsy to have a seizure during physical activity, but you should always take safety precautions when exercising.
      

        People with HIV or hepatitis B or C participate in a wide range of sports without restrictions, and the risk of transmission to another player is extremely small.
      

        Exercise can reduce the risk of fractures resulting from osteoporosis by both slowing the rate of bone loss, and reducing the person?s risk of falling by building muscle strength and improving balance.
      

        A sports injury may be more severe than you think.
      

        Good nutrition and a healthy diet are essential to improving your sports performance.
      

        It’s important for your health that you get enough physical activity every day, and that you limit your sedentary behaviour. But getting the amount of physical activity you need doesn’t have to be hard or unpleasant.
      

        A kilojoule is a unit of measure of energy, in the same way that kilometres measure distance. 
      

        Body mass index or BMI is an approximate measure of your total body fat.
      

        A kilojoule is a unit of measure of energy, in the same way that kilometres measure distance. 
      

        You need to drink enough and regularly to keep hydrated during exercise. 
      

        If you can talk but not sing, you?re exercising at the right intensity.
      

        Exercise is important for your physical and mental health. Working out with a friend means you’re more likely to have fun and stick to your exercise plan.
      

        Do some research before signing up at a fitness centre.
      

        It’s important for kids to eat a wide variety of foods for a healthy, well-balanced diet and to be physically active. Creating healthy habits during childhood helps to ensure lifelong healthy decisions and actions, and build healthy habits into the future.
      

        You can find personal trainers at your local gym or fitness centre, by asking friends for word-of-mouth recommendations or by checking AUSactive’s directory of registered professionals.  
      

        Even if you’re busy, you still need to find a way to be physically active. 
      

        Just 30 minutes of moderate activity each day can improve your health and reduce the risk of developing certain conditions or diseases.
      

        There are many excuses we can come up with to avoid being active, but the truth is there is always a way to fit some physical activity into your day.
      

        When you're trying to become more physically active, set realistic health and fitness goals.
      

        Many men are only motivated to become more active after they have a health scare.
      

        Physical activity can help older people maintain independence, recover from illness and reduce their risk of disease.
      

        If you can't make the time to exercise for yourself, do it for your family.
      

        If you do resistance training repeatedly and consistently, your muscles become stronger.
      

        The majority of Australians adults do not meet the recommended physical activity guidelines to gain the health benefits of increased fitness and reduced body fat.
      

        It’s important for your health that you get enough physical activity every day, and that you limit your sedentary behaviour. But getting the amount of physical activity you need doesn’t have to be hard or unpleasant.
      

        The less sitting or lying down you do during the day, the better your chances for living a healthy life.
      

        Gaining lean body weight is a slow process that takes months and years, rather than days and weeks.
      

        A young child is naturally active, so build upon their inclinations to use their body.
      

        Reach out to the world around you for fun, a sense of achievement, social contact and mental stimulation.
      

        Being physically active, eating well, socialising and improving your health can help you live a healthy, happy and active life as you get older.
      

        Physical activity is an important part of health and wellbeing, and girls should remain active as they grow up.
      

        There are many excuses we can come up with to avoid being active, but the truth is there is always a way to fit some physical activity into your day.
      

        Many men are only motivated to become more active after they have a health scare.
      

        Physical activity can help older people maintain independence, recover from illness and reduce their risk of disease.
      

        Physical Activity and Fitness Trainer - Sherri Bourne shares a few easy and low-impact ways for seniors to stay healthy over the summer months.
      

        If you can't make the time to exercise for yourself, do it for your family.
      

        It is important to consult with your doctor or midwife before embarking on any postnatal exercise program - you may need more time than you think to heal from childbirth.
      

        Unless you have complications, you should be able to exercise throughout your pregnancy.
      

        Make sure that some family outings offer opportunities for physical activity, such as playing sport together.
      

        It’s important for your health that you get enough physical activity every day, and that you limit your sedentary behaviour. But getting the amount of physical activity you need doesn’t have to be hard or unpleasant.
      

        Many sports can be adapted to suit people who are blind or have low vision.
      

        Walking is great exercise for older people. It has a range of health and social benefits, and most people can do it.
      

        Walking will improve your fitness and reduce your risk of heart disease.
      

        There are lots of everyday activities that provide an opportunity to be active and provide health benefits.
      

        If you are unfamiliar with what is involved, starting an exercise program can be challenging.
      

        Exercise is important for your physical and mental health. Working out with a friend means you’re more likely to have fun and stick to your exercise plan.
      

        Reach out to the world around you for fun, a sense of achievement, social contact and mental stimulation.
      

        There are many excuses we can come up with to avoid being active, but the truth is there is always a way to fit some physical activity into your day.
      

        Pick an exercise or fitness activity that appeals to you and suits your lifestyle.
      

        You are more likely to keep up a healthy lifestyle change if your chosen activity suits you.
      

        Many men are only motivated to become more active after they have a health scare.
      

        Physical activity can help older people maintain independence, recover from illness and reduce their risk of disease.
      

        If you can't make the time to exercise for yourself, do it for your family.
      

        It’s important for your health that you get enough physical activity every day, and that you limit your sedentary behaviour. But getting the amount of physical activity you need doesn’t have to be hard or unpleasant.
      

        There are many excuses we can come up with to avoid being active, but the truth is there is always a way to fit some physical activity into your day.
      

        It’s important for your health that you get enough physical activity every day, and that you limit your sedentary behaviour. But getting the amount of physical activity you need doesn’t have to be hard or unpleasant.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        CPR is a life-saving skill that everyone should learn from an accredited organisation.
      

        Being immunised from an early age helps protect your child against serious childhood infections.
      

        There is a range of subsidised and free health services, including services for mental health and dental health, available for children in Victoria.
      

        Parenting is one of the most important tasks we undertake but it doesn't always come naturally.
      

        Everyone's immunisation needs are different and are influenced by your health, lifestyle, age and occupation.
      

        For children diagnosed with a disability, getting the support they need as early as possible will give them the best chance of minimising the long-term effects of the disability. 
      

        Detailing on baby bathing from Royal Women's Hospital
      

        Detail on baby skin care from Royal Women's Hospital
      

        You can help your child overcome anxiety by taking their fears seriously and encouraging them to talk about their feelings.
      

        If your child's shyness is especially debilitating, you may like to consider professional help from a counsellor or psychologist.
      

        Sibling rivalry is a common problem, particularly among children who are the same sex and close together in age.
      

        Disciplining your child means teaching them responsible behaviour and self-control.
      

        Dummy sucking should stop before school age to avoid teeth or mouth problems.
      

        Dyslexia is a type of specific learning difficulty (SLD) in which the person has difficulties with language and words.
      

        When a young child is having a tantrum, it is because the emotional (limbic system) part of the brain is dominating the child's behaviour.
      

        Finger or thumb sucking should stop before school age to avoid mouth problems.
      

        If you restrict yourself to a narrow range of foods, your child will notice and copy your wariness.
      

        Some toddlers do most of their eating on the run, refusing to sit down at the table at all.
      

        Taking care to restrain children correctly while travelling in a car is the best way to prevent injuries.
      

        Being immunised from an early age helps protect your child against serious childhood infections.
      

        Detailing on baby bathing from Royal Women's Hospital
      

        Detail on baby skin care from Royal Women's Hospital
      

        There is a range of subsidised and free health services, including services for mental health and dental health, available for children in Victoria.
      

        Melissa shares her story of how her baby caught chickenpox at 5 weeks old.
      

        This is your first key age and stage visit with a maternal and child health nurse – there are 10 visits in total from birth to when your child is three and a half years.
      

        Breastmilk or commercial infant formula is necessary for all babies less than 12 months.
      

        Breastfeeding positioning and attachment come naturally to some babies and mothers, but many need time and practice to get it right.
      

        Be guided by your baby and let them set the pace when weaning and introducing solid foods.
      

        It is up to you and your baby to decide when breastfeeding should stop.
      

        Expressing breast milk by hand is a cheap and convenient method.
      

        Breastmilk protects your baby from illness and infection, so it is the safest drink for your baby while travelling.
      

        You can successfully combine breastfeeding with work if you have support from your employer, colleagues and family.
      

        Breastfeeding women need to eat regularly and include a wide variety of healthy foods in their diet.
      

        Symptoms of lactose intolerance include bloating, gas, abdominal pain and diarrhoea.
      

        Miscarriage, stillbirth or neonatal death is a shattering event for those expecting a baby. Grief and anxiety about subsequent pregnancies are common in these circumstances but counselling can help.
      

        You can reduce your baby's risk of sudden unexpected death by providing a safe sleeping environment and avoiding tobacco smoke.
      

        Babies and toddlers can be as affected by trauma as any other family member.
      

        Preschoolers may not have the words but will show their distress at traumatic events through changes in behaviour and functioning.
      

        Tell your child the facts about a distressing or frightening experience using language they can understand.
      

        Young babies still have a notion that the whole of life is happening inside themselves, and they are 'making it all happen'.
      

        Fun activities, such as shaking or banging objects, helps a baby understand they have an effect on the world.
      

        At nine months your baby is moving around by crawling or pulling along with their arms. Safety is very important now. Your baby is also 'talking' with recognisable sounds and may even say simple words.
      

        Between the age of one and two, your toddler understands they are a completely separate person from you.
      

        Parents can be tricked into thinking our toddlers are more grown up than they really are.
      

        A child learning to walk receives important sensory information from the soles of their feet, and shoes can make walking more difficult.
      

        Dyslexia is a type of specific learning difficulty (SLD) in which the person has difficulties with language and words.
      

        Babies and young children do not usually grow in a perfectly smooth way, but instead grow in 'bursts'.
      

        Teething symptoms are common in children and can be managed without medications.
      

        When toilet training your toddler, praise every little success and remain calm about accidents.
      

        Bronchiolitis is a common chest infection in babies under 6 months of age
      

        Caring for a crying baby with colic can be stressful, so take some time out to calm down.
      

        Cradle cap is not contagious and it is not caused by poor hygiene or bad parenting.
      

        Croup is a viral infection of the throat and windpipe that causes noisy breathing, a hoarse voice and a harsh, barking cough.
      

        Reflux is common in babies and causes no pain or problems with weight gain in most babies.
      

        Most babies get nappy rash at some stage, no matter how well they are cared for.
      

        Roseola is a mild viral infection with associated fever and rash that affects babies and young children.
      

        Be guided by your baby and let them set the pace when weaning and introducing solid foods.
      

        People who skip breakfast may lack sufficient vitamins and minerals including iron, calcium, zinc and vitamin B2.
      

        First foods for babies can be prepared easily and cheaply at home without salt, seasonings and sweeteners.
      

        If you eat and enjoy fruit and vegetables every day, your child may eventually follow your lead.
      

        Children have a natural ability to sense when they are hungry and when they are full.
      

        Offer children the same foods as the family, with a variety of textures and flavours for balanced nutrition.
      

        About iron and iron deficiency - symptoms, stages, causes, diagnosis, prevention, treatment, who is at risk, daily intake, food sources and supplements.
      

        If you restrict yourself to a narrow range of foods, your child will notice and copy your wariness.
      

        Encourage children to drink and enjoy water. Sweet drinks such as juice, cordial and soft drinks may cause health problems for children if consumed in large amounts.
      

        Some toddlers do most of their eating on the run, refusing to sit down at the table at all.
      

        This is your first key age and stage visit with a maternal and child health nurse – there are 10 visits in total from birth to when your child is three and a half years.
      

        This is your two week key age and stage visit with a maternal and child health nurse – there are 10 visits in total from birth to when your child is three and a half years.
      

        This is your four week key age and stage visit with a maternal and child health nurse – there are 10 visits in total from birth to when your child is three and a half years.
      

        This is your eight week key age and stage visit with a maternal and child health nurse – there are 10 visits in total from birth to when your child is three and a half years.
      

        This is your four month key age and stage visit with a maternal and child health nurse – there are 10 visits in total from birth to when your child is three and a half years.
      

        This is your sixth key age and stage visit with a maternal and child health nurse in your local area.  Maternal and child health nurses work in partnership with families to care for babies and young children until they start school. The service is free for all Victorian families.
      

        This is your seventh key age and stage visit with a maternal and child health nurse in your local area.  Maternal and child health nurses work in partnership with families to care for babies and young children until they start school. The service is free for all Victorian families.
      

        This is your eighth key age and stage visit with a maternal and child health nurse in your local area.  Maternal and child health nurses work in partnership with families to care for babies and young children until they start school. The service is free for all Victorian families.
      

        When your child turns two, it is time for their second from last key age and stage appointment with your maternal and child health nurse.
      

        When your child turns three-and-a-half, it is time for their final key age and stage appointment with your maternal and child health nurse.
      

        Detailing on baby bathing from Royal Women's Hospital
      

        Detail on baby skin care from Royal Women's Hospital
      

        If your baby is full-term and healthy, mild jaundice is nothing to worry about and will resolve by itself within a week or so.
      

        Every newborn baby in Australia is offered a test for the rare medical conditions of phenylketonuria, hypothyroidism, cystic fibrosis and congenital adrenal hyperplasia. 
      

        PKU is an inherited disorder that prevents the normal breakdown of a protein found in some foods.
      

        Sometimes premature labour can be delayed to increase a baby's chance of survival.
      

        You can reduce your baby's risk of sudden unexpected death by providing a safe sleeping environment and avoiding tobacco smoke.
      

        With low levels of vitamin K, some babies can have severe bleeding into the brain, causing significant brain damage.
      

        Most injuries to babies do not occur by chance - many are predictable and largely preventable.
      

        Some children are unsettled the first few nights in a 'big bed'. Try to be patient, loving and reassuring.
      

        Toddlers are most at risk of drowning because they are mobile and curious but don't understand the danger of water.
      

        CPR is a life-saving skill that everyone should learn from an accredited organisation.
      

        Taking care to restrain children correctly while travelling in a car is the best way to prevent injuries.
      

        In an emergency, it is recommended that all infants and their carers evacuate early or immediately when advised by emergency services.
      

        Children exposed to domestic violence are more likely to experience emotional and behavioural problems.
      

        Children who live on farms are at greater risk of injury and death than their parents or other farm workers.
      

        Call the Poisons Information Centre on 13 11 26 immediately if you suspect your child has been poisoned, given the wrong medicine or the wrong dose of medicine.
      

        As they grow and develop, and with the help of adults, children become increasingly aware of how they can manage their own safety, and become safer road users.
      

        You can reduce your baby's risk of sudden unexpected death by providing a safe sleeping environment and avoiding tobacco smoke.
      

        Some children are unsettled the first few nights in a 'big bed'. Try to be patient, loving and reassuring.
      

        A child needs a daytime nap until they are around 2 and a half to 3 years of age.
      

        Your child may have only a few scary dreams a year, or be troubled by nightmares much more often.
      

        You can reduce your baby's risk of sudden unexpected death by providing a safe sleeping environment and avoiding tobacco smoke.
      

        Newborn sleep patterns and behaviours - Newborns generally sleep 12 to 16 hours in a 24-hour period and do not know the difference between day and night.
      

        Baby sleep patterns and behaviours (3 to 6 months) – At this age, babies generally sleep 10 to 18 hours in a 24-hour period and need your help to settle and go to sleep.
      

        Baby sleep patterns and behaviours (6 to 12 months) – From about the age of 6 months, your baby’s sleep patterns gradually become more developed.
      

        Toddler sleep patterns and behaviours (1 to 2 years) – From approximately 12 months of age, toddlers tend to sleep better.
      

        Typical sleep behaviour – (5) toddlers 2 to 3 years – Between the ages of 2 and 3 years, toddlers often sleep 12 to 13 hours in a 24-hour period.
      

        Typical sleep behaviour – (6) preschoolers 3 to 5 years – Preschoolers aged between three and five years sleep between 10 to 13 hours in a 24-hour period. 
      

        Preventing sleep concerns (7) – babies 0 to 6 months – To strengthen the bond with your baby as they grow, you need to provide lots of love, attention and different experiences.
      

        Preventing sleep concerns (8) – babies 6 to 12 months – To strengthen the bond with your baby as they grow, you need to provide lots of love, attention and different experiences.
      

        Preventing sleep concerns (9) – toddlers 1 to 3 years – To strengthen the bond with your baby as they grow, you need to provide lots of love, attention and different experiences.
      

        Solutions to sleep concerns (13) – preschoolers 3 to 5 years – It can be difficult to know whether your preschooler is experiencing a sleep or settling concern.
      

        Preventing sleep concerns (10) – preschoolers 3 to 5 years – It is important that your preschooler feels secure and loved. You can do this by responding to them in a warm and positive way.
      

        Solutions to sleep concerns (11) - babies 6-12 months - If your baby’s sleeping patterns are not affecting you or your family and you have strategies that work, then you do not have a sleep concern. 
      

        Solutions to sleep concerns (12) – toddlers 1 to 3 years – It can be difficult to know whether your toddler is experiencing a sleep or settling concern. 
      

        Self-care and support for parents and carers of young children (14) – The birth of a baby is a very exciting, happy and rewarding time your life.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.
Yoga brings the body and mind together and is built on three main elements – movement, breathing and meditation. Yoga has many physical and mental health benefits including improved posture, flexibility, strength, balance and body awareness.
Always consult your doctor before embarking on any new fitness program, especially if you have a pre-existing medical condition or have not exercised in a long time.
Pilates and yoga are often thought to be one in the same, however Pilates traditionally focuses more on control of movement and muscular endurance as opposed to yoga which connects the body to the mind through flow of movement.
Yoga is an ancient Indian philosophy that dates back thousands of years. It was designed as a path to spiritual enlightenment, but in modern times, the physical aspects of yoga have found huge popularity as a gentle form of exercise and stress management. There are many different varieties of yoga, but each one essentially relies on structured poses (asanas) practiced with breath awareness.
Researchers have discovered that the regular practice of yoga may produce many health benefits, including increased cardiovascular fitness, improved muscular strength and normalisation of blood pressure. Yoga is a renowned antidote to stress and promotes improved sleeping patterns. Over time, those who practice yoga report lower levels of stress, and increased feelings of happiness and wellbeing. This is because concentrating on the postures and the breath acts as a form of meditation.
The classical techniques of yoga date back more than 5000 years. The practice of yoga encourages effort, intelligence, accuracy, thoroughness, commitment and dedication. The word yoga originates from the Sanskrit language and means ‘to join or yoke together’. It brings your body and mind together, and is built on three main elements – exercise, breathing and meditation.
The movements of yoga are designed to  challenge flexibility, balance, coordination and strength, increasing your body’s efficiency and overall health. Breathing techniques promote greater mind body connection, improving the  function of body and mind.
Focusing on controlled movement and breathing prepares the body and mind for meditation, with an approach to a quiet mind that allows silence and relief from everyday stress. When practiced regularly, yoga can become a powerful and sophisticated discipline for achieving physical, mental and emotional wellbeing.
There are many different varieties of yoga, each with a slightly different slant. The most popular are Hatha, Bikram, Iyengar, Yin and Vinyasa yoga.
Each yoga posture, or asana, is held for a period of time and linked with controlled breathing. Generally, a yoga session begins with gentle asanas and works up to more vigorous or challenging postures. A full yoga session should move every part of your body and should include pranayama (breath control practices), relaxation and meditation.
The different postures or asanas include:
The practice of yoga asanas develops strength and flexibility, while soothing your nerves and calming your mind. The asanas affect the muscles, joints and skin, and the whole body – glands, nerves, internal organs, bones, respiration and the brain. The physical building blocks of yoga are the posture and the breath.
Health benefits of yoga include:
Yoga is taught in classes, catering for beginners through to advanced participants. It is non-competitive and suitable for anyone, regardless of your age or fitness level. Your yoga teacher should carefully guide and observe you, and modify postures when necessary.
An asana should never cause pain. If you experience pain or discomfort, ease back on the stretch or don’t do it at all. It is important to keep within your physical limits.
If you are a male over 45 years of age or a female over 55 years of age, haven’t exercised for a long time or have a pre-existing medical condition, you should check with your preferred general practitioner or another suitably qualified professional before starting any new or regular exercise routine.
Pre-exercise  screeningExternal Link   is used to identify people with medical conditions or contraindications that may put them at a higher risk of experiencing an adverse event during physical activity. It is a tool to help decide if the potential benefits of exercise outweigh the risks for you and whether you should seek further guidance from an allied health or medical professional.
Yoga classes usually have 10 to 20 people, allowing for individual attention. Suggestions for getting the most out of your yoga class include:

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

Content on this website is provided for information purposes only. Information about a therapy, service, product or treatment does not in any way endorse or support such therapy, service, product or treatment and is not intended to replace advice from your doctor or other registered health professional. The information and materials contained on this website are not intended to constitute a comprehensive guide concerning all aspects of the therapy, product or treatment described on the website. All users are urged to always seek advice from a registered health care professional for diagnosis and answers to their medical questions and to ascertain whether the particular therapy, service, product or treatment described on the website is suitable in their circumstances. The State of Victoria and the Department of Health shall not bear any liability for reliance by any user on the materials contained on this website.

This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.

        Sibling rivalry is a common problem, particularly among children who are the same sex and close together in age.
      

        How parents and carers can talk to children about relationships, sex and sexuality. Includes - how and when to start, topics at different ages and stages, teenage sex, school safety and support. 
      

        It is helpful to imagine assertiveness as the middle ground between aggression and passivity.
      

        Peer groups can be a very positive influence on your teenager's life.
      

        Intimacy in a relationship means being able to share a whole range of thoughts, feelings and experiences that we have as human beings.
      

        A good relationship doesn't just happen - you have to work at it.
      

        Good communication is about the way we talk and listen, and about our body language.
      

        Having friends and other social connections is good for your health and wellbeing.
      

        Sibling rivalry is a common problem, particularly among children who are the same sex and close together in age.
      

        It is normal to disagree with each other from time to time and occasional conflict is part of family life.
      

        It might be valuable to occasionally evaluate the dynamics of your family to ensure that everyone is as happy as they could be.
      

        Managing a relationship breakdown is difficult. What you feel during a relationship breakdown may be very hard, but it will pass in time.
      

        The birth of your first child can significantly change your relationship with your partner and may impact on other relationships.
      

        Provides an overview of family support programs and health services available to refugees and asylum seekers living in Victoria.
      

        How parents and carers can talk to children about relationships, sex and sexuality. Includes - how and when to start, topics at different ages and stages, teenage sex, school safety and support. 
      

        There are many people you can talk to who can help you overcome feelings of wanting to lash out.
      

        Victoria has a range of services available to help people at risk of, experiencing or escaping from family violence.
      

        The sooner a person with a mental illness receives treatment, the better the outcome is likely to be.
      

        There is a range of non-government agencies available to help families under stress in caring for their children.
      

        Provides an overview of family support programs and health services available to refugees and asylum seekers living in Victoria.
      

        You may need outside help to resolve problems and ensure your relationship stays healthy and strong.
      

        When you, your partner or someone in your family has a mental illness, it can cause stress and worry for everyone.
      

        Having friends and other social connections is good for your health and wellbeing.
      

        Managing a relationship breakdown is difficult. What you feel during a relationship breakdown may be very hard, but it will pass in time.
      

        You may need outside help to resolve problems and ensure your relationship stays healthy and strong.
      

        With the physical and emotional closeness of a partnership, it is inevitable that there is sometimes conflict.
      

        A good relationship doesn't just happen - you have to work at it.
      

        Good communication is about the way we talk and listen, and about our body language.
      

        Having friends and other social connections is good for your health and wellbeing.
      

        The expense of gifts and food, the pressure of shopping, and the expectations of the season can make Christmas an extremely stressful time.
      

        Managing a relationship breakdown is difficult. What you feel during a relationship breakdown may be very hard, but it will pass in time.
      

        The birth of your first child can significantly change your relationship with your partner and may impact on other relationships.
      

        Intimacy in a relationship means being able to share a whole range of thoughts, feelings and experiences that we have as human beings.
      

        With the physical and emotional closeness of a partnership, it is inevitable that there is sometimes conflict.
      

        When you, your partner or someone in your family has a mental illness, it can cause stress and worry for everyone.
      

        Managing a relationship breakdown is difficult. What you feel during a relationship breakdown may be very hard, but it will pass in time.
      

        If you are thinking about re-partnering, there are questions you can ask yourself to check whether you are emotionally ready to do so.
      

        A family breakup may be even harder for children if they have to move house as a result.
      

        Separating parents can help children by giving them honest explanations and emotional support.
      

        Managing a relationship breakdown is difficult. What you feel during a relationship breakdown may be very hard, but it will pass in time.
      

        Well-managed anger can be a useful emotion that motivates you to make positive changes.
      

        Children exposed to domestic violence are more likely to experience emotional and behavioural problems.
      

        Perpetrators often make excuses for their violence, for example, blaming alcohol or stress.
      

        You can successfully combine breastfeeding with work if you have support from your employer, colleagues and family.
      

        Work-related stress causes an increase in sick days and absenteeism, a higher turnover of staff and a drop in productivity.
      
This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.
A joint is the part of the body where two or more bones meet to allow movement. Every bone in the body – except for the hyoid bone in the throat – meets up with at least one other bone at a joint. The shape of a joint depends on its function. A joint is also known as an articulation. 
Generally speaking, the more movement that is possible through a joint, the higher the risk of injury. This is because greater range of movement reduces the strength of the joint.
Joints are described by how much movement they allow. The three broad classes of joints include:
The six types of freely movable joint include:
To achieve movement, the joint may:
Joints are held together and supported by tough bands of connective tissue called ligaments. Smooth cartilage prevents friction as the bones move against one another. In freely movable joints, the entire joint is enclosed inside a membrane filled with lubricating synovial fluid, which helps to provide extra cushioning against impact. 
Muscles are attached to bones with thick, tough bands of connective tissue called tendons. Where tendons lie close to bone, tiny sacs called bursae sit between the tendon and the bone to reduce friction. A bursa is filled with synovial fluid.
Common causes of joint pain include:

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

Content on this website is provided for information purposes only. Information about a therapy, service, product or treatment does not in any way endorse or support such therapy, service, product or treatment and is not intended to replace advice from your doctor or other registered health professional. The information and materials contained on this website are not intended to constitute a comprehensive guide concerning all aspects of the therapy, product or treatment described on the website. All users are urged to always seek advice from a registered health care professional for diagnosis and answers to their medical questions and to ascertain whether the particular therapy, service, product or treatment described on the website is suitable in their circumstances. The State of Victoria and the Department of Health shall not bear any liability for reliance by any user on the materials contained on this website.

This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.
The nervous system helps all the parts of the body to communicate with each other. It also reacts to changes both outside and inside the body. The nervous system uses both electrical and chemical means to send and receive messages.
The basic building block of the nervous system is a nerve cell, or neurone. Neurones are shaped differently depending on where they are in the body and what role they play. All neurones have finger-like projections called dendrites and a long fibre called an axon. 
In many cases, the axon is coated by a specialised membrane called a myelin sheath. The axon feathers out and has a number of bumps on it. Each bump sits near to a dendrite from another neurone. The space between the bump and the dendrite is called a synapse. Messages jump the synapse from one neurone to the next, using special chemicals called neurotransmitters. 
Unlike other cells in the body, neurones aren’t easily replaced if they die or are damaged by infection or injury.
The brain and the spinal cord make up the central nervous system. They are wrapped in a thin lining called meninges and bathed with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).
The brain is the powerhouse of the body, even though it only makes up 2 per cent of the body’s weight. This soft, jelly-like organ has countless billions of neural cross-connections. The brain oversees the workings of the body, while its higher functions give us consciousness and personality.
The spinal cord is connected to the brain and runs the length of the body. It is protected by the bones of the spine (vertebrae). Nerves branch off from the spinal cord into the arms, legs and torso.
Nerves connect the brain and spinal cord to the peripheral nervous system, which is what nerve tissue outside of the central nervous system is called. It is made up of two main parts: the autonomic and the somatic nervous systems.
The autonomic nervous system is part of the peripheral nervous system. One of its main roles is to regulate glands and organs without any effort from our conscious minds. 
The autonomic nervous system is made up of two parts: the sympathetic and the parasympathetic. These systems act on the body in opposite ways. Together, they coordinate a multitude of adjustments required for our changing personal needs as we move through our environment. For example, the size of our pupils is adjusted automatically to allow the correct amount of light into our eyes for optimum vision, our sweat glands are turned on when we get too hot and our salivary glands produce saliva when we eat food (or even think about it!).
The somatic nervous system is also a part of the peripheral nervous system. One of its roles is to relay information from the eyes, ears, skin and muscle to the central nervous system (brain and spinal cord). It also obeys commands from the central nervous system and makes muscles contract or relax, allowing us to move.
Some common problems of the nervous system include:

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

        The long-term effects of brain injury will be different for each person and can range from mild to profound.
      

        A person with alcohol related brain impairment (ARBI) might experience problems with coordination, thinking, planning and memory.
      

        Loss of memory can be temporary or permanent, but 'amnesia' usually refers to the temporary variety.
      

      This page has been produced in consultation with and approved
      by:
    

Content on this website is provided for information purposes only. Information about a therapy, service, product or treatment does not in any way endorse or support such therapy, service, product or treatment and is not intended to replace advice from your doctor or other registered health professional. The information and materials contained on this website are not intended to constitute a comprehensive guide concerning all aspects of the therapy, product or treatment described on the website. All users are urged to always seek advice from a registered health care professional for diagnosis and answers to their medical questions and to ascertain whether the particular therapy, service, product or treatment described on the website is suitable in their circumstances. The State of Victoria and the Department of Health shall not bear any liability for reliance by any user on the materials contained on this website.

This web site is managed and authorised by the Department of Health, State Government of Victoria, Australia © Copyright State of Victoria 2024.
